\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-



@documentlanguage en



@c $Id: gcal.texi v3.01 2000/06/24 03:00:01 tom Exp $
@c
@c gcal.texi:  American-English Texinfo source of info/html/dvi/text file
@c
@c Copyright (c) 1994, 95, 96, 1997, 2000 Thomas Esken
@c Copyright (c) 2014 Free Software Foundation Inc.
@c
@c
@c Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
@c this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
@c are preserved on all copies.
@c
@c Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
@c manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
@c resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
@c notice identical to this one.
@c
@c Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
@c into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
@c except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
@c by the Free Software Foundation.
@c
@c
@c ------------------------oOO      \\\_''/      OOo---------------------------
@c Thomas Esken               O     (/o-o\)     O  eMail: esken@gmx.net
@c Im Hagenfeld 84                 ((  ^  ))       Phone: +49 251 232585
@c D-48147 Muenster; Germany    \____) ~ (____/    MotD : 2old2live, 2young2die



@c %**start of header
@c
@setfilename gcal.info
@c
@c Some necessary constant definitions
@c
@set EDITION 4.1
@set UPDATE-DATE 24 June 2000
@set UPDATE-MONTH June 2000
@set GCAL-VERSION 4.1
@c
@settitle Gcal @value{GCAL-VERSION}
@c
@setchapternewpage odd
@setshortcontentsaftertitlepage
@paragraphindent 2
@footnotestyle separate
@c @smallbook
@c
@c Index of command line arguments
@c
@defcodeindex ar
@c
@c Index of tables
@c
@defcodeindex tb
@c
@finalout
@c
@c %**end of header



@c %**Start of info dir entry
@c
@dircategory GNU packages
@direntry
* Gcal: (gcal).                       GNU calendar program.
* Tcal: (gcal)Invoking tcal.          Run Gcal with tomorrow's date.
* Txt2gcal: (gcal)Invoking txt2gcal.  Calendar text to resource file.
* Gcal2txt: (gcal)Invoking gcal2txt.  Calendar resource to text file.
@end direntry
@c
@c %**End of info dir entry



@ifinfo
This file documents Gcal, a program for calculating and printing calendars.

Copyright (c) 1994, 95, 96, 1997, 2000 Thomas Esken
Copyright (c) 2010, 2011, 2013 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

This edition is for Gcal version @value{GCAL-VERSION}@.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover
Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU
Free Documentation License''.
@end quotation

Any suggestions, improvements, extensions, bug reports, donations,
proposals for contract work, and so forth are welcome!  Please send
them directly to my eMail address @email{esken@@gmx.net}@ or to
@email{bug-gcal@@gnu.org}.  If you like my work, I'd appreciate a
postcard from you!

@format
------------------------oOO      \\\_''/      OOo---------------------------
Thomas Esken               O     (/o-o\)     O  eMail: esken@@gmx.net
Im Hagenfeld 84                 ((  ^  ))       Phone: +49 251 232585
D-48147 Muenster; Germany    \____) ~ (____/    MotD : 2old2live, 2young2die
@end format
@end ifinfo



@c %**Start of titlepage part
@c
@shorttitlepage Gcal
@c
@titlepage
@title Gcal
@subtitle An Extended Calendar Program
@subtitle Edition @value{EDITION}
@subtitle @value{UPDATE-MONTH}
@author by Thomas Esken
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1994, 95, 96, 1997, 2000 Thomas Esken

@sp 2

@cartouche
@quotation
Any suggestions, improvements, extensions, bug reports, donations,
proposals for contract work, and so forth are welcome!  Please send
them directly to my eMail address @email{esken@@gmx.net}@.  If you
like my work, I'd appreciate a postcard from you!

@example
@group
@center ------------------------oOO      \\\_''/      OOo---------------------------
@center Thomas Esken               O     (/o-o\)     O  eMail:         esken@@gmx.net
@center Im Hagenfeld 84                 ((  ^  ))       Phone:        +49 251 232585
@center D-48147 Muenster; Germany    \____) ~ (____/    MotD : 2old2live, 2young2die
@end group
@end example
@end quotation
@end cartouche

@sp 2

This is Edition @value{EDITION} of @cite{Gcal, an Extended Calendar Program},@*
for the @value{GCAL-VERSION} (or later) version of the GNU implementation@*
of @command{cal} and @command{calendar}@.
@sp 2

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation
approved by the Free Software Foundation.
@end titlepage
@c
@c %**End of titlepage part



@c %**Start of contents part
@c
@headings on
@c
@contents
@c
@c %**End of contents part



@c %**Start of master menu part
@c
@ifnottex
@node Top, Preface, (dir), (dir)
@top Gcal

This file documents @command{gcal}, a program for calculating
and printing calendars.

Gcal displays hybrid and proleptic Julian and Gregorian calendar sheets,
respectively, for one month, three months or a whole year.  It also
displays eternal holiday lists for many countries around the globe,
and features a very powerful creation of fixed date lists that can be
used for reminding purposes.  Gcal can calculate various astronomical
data and times of the Sun and the Moon for at pleasure any location,
precisely enough for most civil purposes.  Gcal supports some other
calendar systems, for example the Chinese calendar, the Hebrew calendar
and the civil Islamic calendar, too.

This is Edition @value{EDITION} of @cite{Gcal, an Extended Calendar Program},@*
@w{@value{UPDATE-DATE},} for the @value{GCAL-VERSION} version
of the GNU implementation@*
of @command{cal} and @command{calendar}@.

Any suggestions, improvements, extensions, bug reports, donations,
proposals for contract work, and so forth are welcome!  Please send
them directly to my eMail address @email{esken@@gmx.net}@.  If you
like my work, I'd appreciate a postcard from you!

@format
------------------------oOO      \\\_''/      OOo---------------------------
Thomas Esken               O     (/o-o\)     O  eMail: esken@@gmx.net
Im Hagenfeld 84                 ((  ^  ))       Phone: +49 251 232585
D-48147 Muenster; Germany    \____) ~ (____/    MotD : 2old2live, 2young2die
@end format
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Preface::            Preliminary remarks to Gcal.
* Gcal Introduction::  Gcal in brief.
* Invoking Gcal::      How to run and use the @command{gcal} program.
* Eternal Holidays::   How to create an Eternal Holiday list.
* Fixed Dates::        How to create a Fixed Date list.

Appendices

* Todays Calendar::        Genesis of the Gregorian Calendar.
* Gcal Utilities::         Utility programs which are part of the distribution.
* Internationalization::   Aspects of Internationalization been made.
* Metasymbols::            Metasymbols used in this manual.
* Regular Expressions::    Description of all Regular Expressions.
* Regexp Summary::         Summary of all Regular Expressions.
* Special Texts::          Description of all @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} Special Texts.
* Special Texts Summary::  Summary of all @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} Special Texts.
* Obsolete Special Texts:: Tables of obsolete Special Texts et cetera.
* Format Instruction::     Description of the Format Instruction components.
* Coding Scheme::          Coding Scheme of date part in resource file.
* Environment Variables::  Used Environment Variables.
* Error Codes::            Which Error Codes does Gcal return?
* Glossary::               Short descriptions of the terms used here.

Indices

* Argument Index::  Index of Command line arguments respected.
* Variable Index::  Index of Environment Variables used.
* Table Index::     Index of Tables that can be found in this manual.
* GNU Free Documentation License:: Copying and sharing this manual.
* Concept Index::   A menu covering many topics.

@detailmenu
  --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Invoking Gcal

* Command line arguments::         Command line arguments.
* The GCAL environment variable::  How to use the @env{GCAL} environment variable.

Command line arguments

* Options::               How to use Options.
* Response file::         How to use a @option{@@@var{file}} Response file.
* Actual date modifier::  How to use a @option{%@var{date}} Actual date modifier.
* Commands::              How to use Commands.

Options

* Common options::      How to use Common options.
* Global options::      How to use Global options.
* Calendar options::    How to use Calendar options.
* Fixed date options::  How to use Fixed date options.

Commands

* Single commands::        How to use a Single command.
* 3-Month mode commands::  How to use a 3-Month mode command.
* Lists of commands::      How to use a List of commands.
* Ranges of commands::     How to use a Range of commands.

Fixed Dates

* Resource file::           How to use a Resource file.
* Resource file examples::  Examples of Resource file entries.

Resource file

* Structure of resource file::    How to write a Resource file.
* Date part of a line::           How to write the Date part.
* Further date part attributes::  What are Further date part attributes?
* Text part of a line::           How to write the Text part.
* Special Texts processed::       What are @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} Special Texts?
* Comment line::                  What is a Comment line?
* Include directives::            What are Include directives?
* Date variables::                How Date variables can be used.
* Text variables::                How Text variables can be used.

Further date part attributes

* Lists of days::              How Lists of days can be used.
* Ranges of days::             How Ranges of days can be used.
* Repetition factor of days::  How to use such a factor.
* Appearance factor of days::  How to use such a factor.

Gcal Utilities

* Invoking tcal::      How to run @command{tcal} and a summary of its options.
* Invoking txt2gcal::  How to run @command{txt2gcal} and a summary of its options.
* Invoking gcal2txt::  How to run @command{gcal2txt} and a summary of its options.

Regular Expressions

* Regexp Usage::      How to Use Regular Expressions.
* Regexp Operators::  Regular Expression Operators.

Special Texts

* Exclusions::     How to Exclude dates.
* Replacements::   How to Replace texts.
* Shell Command::  How to run a Shell Command.

Exclusions

* Exclusions with date argument::
* Exclusions without any argument::

Exclusions with date argument

* Inclusive date period::
* Exclusive date period::

Exclusions without any argument

* Inclusive day period::
* Exclusive day period::

Replacements

* Replacements with date argument::
* Replacements with other argument::
* Replacements without any argument::

Replacements with date argument

* Weekday name::
* Weekday number::
* Day-of-year number::
* Day number::
* Week number::
* Month name::
* Month number::
* Year number::
* Moon phase::
* Biorhythm::
* Difference value::

Replacements with other argument

* Actual clocktime::
* Textual date::
* Julian day number::
* Geographical distance and course angle::
* Sun data::
* Moon data::
* Contents of Environment variable::

Replacements without any argument

* Other difference values::
* Highlighting::

Obsolete Special Texts

* Table of Obsolete Special Texts::
* Table of Obsolete Date Format Elements::
* Table of Obsolete Date Formats::

Coding Scheme

* Coding Scheme Table 1::
* Coding Scheme Table 2::
@end detailmenu
@end menu
@c
@c %**End of master menu part



@c %**Start of manual part
@c
@node Preface, Gcal Introduction, Top, Top
@chapter Preface
@cindex Preliminary remarks to Gcal
@cindex Gcal, preliminary remarks

The reason why I have written Gcal was mainly to have an @emph{off-line}
tool@footnote{I.e.@: no need to search for calendar information in the net so
phone and Internet Service Provider (@acronym{ISP}) costs are reduced, and
furthermore, neither searching for such information in books or data files
nor the need to use several other software which altogether do what Gcal
actually also does.} which is able to display Julian and Gregorian calendar
sheets in a highly flexible and internationalized manner, fixed date lists
for reminding purposes and country respectively territory specific holiday
lists.  At a later stage, Gcal was extended in the way to perform some basic
astronomical calculations like Moon phase, moonrise, moonset and other Moon
based data, sunset, sunrise, different twilight times and other Sun based
data, zodiacal markers, solar and lunar eclipses, equinoxes and solstices.
Other gimmicks like biorhythm calculation and the computation of a distance
between two geographical point locations and their course angles (true tracks)
are also done by it now, plus a lot more.

@cindex Precision of astronomical calculations
@cindex Astronomical calculations, precision
@cindex Accuracy of astronomical calculations
@cindex Astronomical calculations, accuracy
The accuracy of most of the astronomical calculations done by Gcal is
low because it is really hard to perform accurate astronomical predictions
more that 100 years ahead.  Of course, this also has consequences for some
country specific holidays which are based on such astronomical calculations.
So it is really possible that some output may differ from the real
astronomical date and time of the event calculated, and that by one
or more @w{minutes/hours/days}@.  This can happen when the date of a real
astronomical event occurs near around midnight.  So don't be surprised!
Strictly speaking, take all such astronomically based output as a more
or less good approximation of the true value, but do not rely on it!

Because Gcal is not primarily designed for the purpose of having a high
precision astronomical calculation tool, the world currently has to live
with these limitations.  But if @strong{you} have C source code functions,
which

@itemize @bullet
@item
perform the astronomical calculations more precise for the period that is
respected by Gcal,

@item
have the similar or faster processing speed than Gcal's actual functions,

@item
are either put into the public domain or are covered by the
GPL@footnote{The ``General Public License'' of the Free Software Foundation.},

@item
have the same calling conventions and return types like Gcal's actual
functions,

@item
conform to the GNU coding standard and are therefore easy to maintain
and extend,

@item
do not break Gcal internal limitations and concepts,
@end itemize

@noindent
and you want to grant them to the public, I would be very pleased if you
would contact me so I am able to implement your result to a next release
of this software.

Some words to the build-in country specific holidays now@dots{}

As you certainly know, there are several other calendar systems actually
existing around the world among the Gregorian calendar.  The Gregorian
calendar that Gcal mainly represents as a software is only one calendar of
many others, but it is that one which is most respected around the world
today.  Even countries which use another calendar system officially mostly
respect the Gregorian calendar for civil and administrative purposes.

But when Gcal offers the ability to include holidays from a definite country
into its eternal holiday list, it is possible that not all holidays are
displayed which are respected in that country.  One reason is that my
various sources simply don't tell me about the existence of a holiday.
A second reason is that the holiday is just designed or changed or removed
by political or society reality during Gcal's development phase.  And another
reason is that the method to calculate a holiday is not build-in Gcal yet.
This case is marked by a @samp{#} character behind the country name in the
list of countries, which are respected by Gcal.
@xref{x-cc-holidays, , Calendar option @option{--cc-holidays=@var{cc}@r{[}_@var{tt}@r{][}+@r{@dots{}]}}},
for the above mentioned list.@*
The holidays of @dfn{early} years that are included into the eternal holiday
list ---i.e.@: those within the period @acronym{AD} 30 until the midth
of the 20th century--- are certainly not accomplishing the requirements of
historians to such a list.  Gcal cannot be understood as a complete and
historically correct data base, and it is not designed for that purpose!
This is caused by the fact that the territorial borders and names of the
national structures and the settlement in earlier times was partly quite
different as it is nowadays.  Moreover, I am yet lacking reliable information
that tells me the precise date of the introduction of a holiday in a region.
Here I appeal to the historians to support me with the concrete country
and culture based data if they are bothered by this fact and they want to
have it removed.

Still unsupported @strong{alive} and @strong{major} calendar systems,
respectively methods to derive country specific holidays from them, are:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Religious Islamic lunar calendar

@item
Hindu solar and lunar calendars

@item
Buddhist calendar

@item
Sikh calendar

@item
Jain calendar
@end itemize

Even if the list of supported countries seems to be almost complete if you
compare it with the actual list of all nations existing around the world,
you should note that there are still some countries missing!  If you can
grant me support to complete Gcal's list of respected countries, or if
you would work out or have C functions which manage the missing calendar
systems, I also would be very pleased about if you would contact me.

I have recorded the country specific holiday dates as good as I can,
but I cannot guarantee that I did not made any mistakes while I hacked
them in.  So it is possible that some country specific holiday lists
contain errors.

Well, if you think that I forgot to provide Gcal with the specific holidays
of @w{a/your} country, or you think that a country specific holiday list is
incomplete, or you think that some of the already implemented holidays are
wrong, please feel free to send me a complete list of all the holidays which
are celebrated in this country respectively to give me hints how to correct
or to complete them!

Such a list should ideally include the following information:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The English name of the holiday.

@item
The rule how it is built (like 10th October each year, or 47 days after Easter
Sunday's date, or three Fridays before the last Saturday in June@dots{}).
If there are any exceptions from such a general rule, please state them
in a detailed manner.  And please tell me the date since what time the
holiday is or was celebrated for the first time, respectively.

By the way, if the holiday is tied to the Easter Sunday's date, please
tell me whether you mean the Easter Sunday of the Christian Western churches
or the Easter Sunday of the Orthodox Christian Eastern churches.

@item
@cindex Legal holiday
@cindex Holiday, legal
Whether it is a @dfn{legal holiday} which is respected in the whole country.
(Use a @samp{+} character for marking this case.)
In this sense, a legal holiday means a day people don't have to work ---
as in most companies, and businesses are closed; like @w{@samp{New Year's Day}}
on January 1st.

@item
Whether it is a legal holiday in some parts of your country only.  Please
tell me whether such a holiday is valid in major parts of the country or
not, try to express that by using percent points.
(If such a holiday is celebrated in more than 70% of the country,
use a @samp{#} character for marking this case, otherwise use a
@samp{*} character.)

@item
Whether it is a day only used for memorial or remembering purposes.
(Use a @samp{-} character for marking this case.)
Like @w{@samp{All Fool's Day}} on April 1st is not a holiday in the sense
that anyone has a day off from school or work, just a @emph{play jokes} day,
pretty ordinary.  Other holidays may be celebrated with cards or presents
etc.@: --- but they are working days such as:

@example
Valentine's day, Father's day, Mother's day.
@end example
@end itemize

@cindex Religious Islamic calendar
@cindex Islamic calendar, religious
@cindex Civil Islamic calendar
@cindex Islamic calendar, civil
The Islamic holidays inserted into the country specific holiday list are
calculated arithmetically, not astronomically.  This is what people call
the @dfn{civil} Islamic lunar calendar.  This type of calendar is just a
rough estimate of the religious Islamic lunar calendar, which is determined
quite astronomically.  So don't be surprised too much if some holiday dates
differ from the religious Islamic calendar about
@ifnottex
@w{+/- 1@dots{}2}
@end ifnottex
@tex
$\pm$ 1\dots 2
@end tex
days in some years.@*
The main difficulty to implement the religious Islamic calendar correctly
into Gcal are the several different criteria that are existing for the first
sighting of the crescent Moon after a New Moon phase --- that event, which
defines the beginning of a new (lunar) month in the religious oriented Islamic
calendar.  So on the one hand, there are quite astronomically-based
criteria, and on the other hand, there are also quite religiously-based
criteria.  Furthermore, the local predominant weather conditions, the
geographical @w{co-ordinate} of the observer's location and the kind of
the observance method used also affect these criteria.  Moreover, to
render all more difficult, I as yet do not have any reliable information
that tells me which kind of criteria is used in the countries (around
60 @w{world-wide}) which respect this religious Islamic calendar.  So due
to all the above mentioned facts of problematic nature, this religious
Islamic calendar is not included into Gcal yet.

@cindex Chinese calendar
@cindex Calendar, Chinese
@cindex Japanese calendar
@cindex Calendar, Japanese
The Chinese (and Japanese) holidays also inserted into the country specific
holiday list are calculated by using that algorithm as it is used by the
Purple Mountain Observatory in Nanjing to determine the astronomical lunisolar
Chinese calendar.  This calendar is obligatory for (the Peoples Republic of)
China since 1929 and is determined annually always new.  Nevertheless and
strictly speaking, in the historic reality and depending on the region, the
Chinese calendar, especially in the 17th and 18th century, was either
calculated using this @emph{modern} algorithm, or by the use of a different
method, so that a different calendar structure for one and the same year was
possibly calculated as result.
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

And last@dots{}

This manual shows the possible use of the Gcal program only briefly
and deliberately renounces to present the topics that are covered by
this software arranged in a novel-like style.
The use of Gcal is illustrated in an exemplary manner only!
A detailed description of all possible use is inexpedient here because there
are simply too many of such possibilities which are caused by the existing
variety of combinations of all useable modes of operation.

Furthermore, this manual does not contain detailed explanations about
the calendar systems supported by Gcal, nor it can be understood as a
reference-book for the basics in celestial mechanics or spherical
trigonometry!  A detailed discussion of the above topics is completely
beyond the scope of this manual.  If you are interested to learn more
about these subjects, you unfortunately have to read the specific
pertinent literature.

Any further errors occurring in the output of the above mentioned holiday
lists and in the astronomical calculations are my own fault, and are not
intended to offend members of any culture, religion or profession!

@node Gcal Introduction, Invoking Gcal, Preface, Top
@chapter Gcal Introduction
@cindex Gcal Introduction
@cindex Introduction, Gcal

Apart from the usual and well known calendar functions like the output of
a month or a year calendar sheet, or the output of an eternal holiday list,
Gcal, the Gregorian calendar program of the Free Software Foundation, offers
the facility to display fixed dates on the day of their occurrence and to
remind or inform the user about them.  So it is imaginable after booting the
computer or starting the work session, that the user is informed on screen
or by means of electronic mail about all holidays or appointments which are
observed or scheduled for that day.

The period, for which Gcal respects occurring fixed dates, may be freely
selected by the user.  So it is possible that Gcal displays all fixed dates
which occur on tomorrow's date, the whole week, the whole month or in the
whole year.  Fixed dates which occur on a selected date of the year, and those
that occur relative to another given date, are displayed either related to
this single date only, or in listed manner starting on this date and ending
on the actual date@footnote{Inclusive or exclusive.}@.

There are two methods to display a preview of fixed dates@footnote{Future
years.} or retrospective view of fixed dates@footnote{Past years.}@.  On the
one hand, Gcal can be started by using an option that sets the system date of
the computer to the given date during the time of the program execution with
the result, the program assumes the system date is set to this given date and
the user can define any needed period that should be respected by an option.
On the other hand, Gcal can be started with a command which forces the program
to use a different year instead of the actual year, so Gcal will display all
occurring fixed dates for this particular year.  But this limits the user
in that it disables defining any needed period by an option, because the
period is always set to the whole year by default.

Gcal isn't only able to display fixed dates which are stored for a concrete
date, e.g.@: @samp{Fixed date on 1st December 1995}, rather than fixed dates
occurring periodically again and again.  So it is possible to define repeated
events like @samp{This fixed date occurs every day in May 1995} or
@samp{Every 15th November in any years}@.  These fixed date definitions
are stored in resource files and whenever Gcal is started, an option to
evaluate the necessary resource files can be given.

Once the user has set his/her preferred command line arguments for querying
the fixed dates data base, it is possible to store them in a response file or
shell script file.  A response file contains all arguments delivered to Gcal,
but unlike a shell script file, such a response file isn't executable; it is
only a pool of command line arguments which can be preloaded if needed.  A
shell script file can be started and calls Gcal directly with all arguments
stored in it and all arguments which are given further in the command line.

A list of all usable command line arguments and their descriptions can be
found in the next chapter, which helps one to use Gcal in the most efficient
and productive way possible.  After it follows the description how to use
the eternal holiday list, and in the succeeding chapter, how to use the
fixed date list.  Comprehensive explanations respectively summaries and
tables to definite details or themes from other disciplines can be found
in the numerous appendices.

@node Invoking Gcal, Eternal Holidays, Gcal Introduction, Top
@chapter Invoking @command{gcal}
@cindex Invoking @command{gcal}

@menu
* Command line arguments::         Command line arguments.
* The GCAL environment variable::  How to use the @env{GCAL} environment variable.
@end menu

@cindex Shell
@cindex Command line interpreter
Gcal is a command line oriented program.  It is usually called from the
@dfn{shell}@footnote{This is an operating system program which interprets
and runs given command lines.} and processes given arguments that are options
and commands.  Options must be given before commands, i.e.@: you must call
Gcal like this:
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@example
@center gcal @r{[ [}@var{option}@r{@dots{}] [}%@var{date}@r{] [}@@@var{file}@r{@dots{}] ]  [}@var{command}@r{]}
@end example

@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

If Gcal is started without any options or commands, a calendar of the current
month is displayed.  If the calendar of a definite year is wanted, the year
must be fully specified, e.g.@: @samp{gcal 94} displays a year calendar of
the year 94, not of the year 1994@.

If two arguments are given in the command part, the @strong{first} argument
denotes the month, and the @strong{second} argument denotes the year.  In
case any incorrect commands are given running Gcal, the program will use
internal defaults.

In the English program version, Gcal assumes the Gregorian Reformation has
occurred in 1752 on the 3rd of September.
@xref{Todays Calendar, , Genesis of the Gregorian Calendar},
and
@ref{Internationalization, , Aspects in Internationalization},
for further details.

@page
@node Command line arguments, The GCAL environment variable, Invoking Gcal, Invoking Gcal
@section Command line arguments
@cindex Command line, arguments
@cindex Arguments of command line
@cindex Options
@cindex Options of @command{gcal}
@cindex @command{gcal}, options
@cindex @option{%@var{date}}, option
@cindex Option @option{%@var{date}}
@cindex @option{@@@var{file}}, option
@cindex Option @option{@@@var{file}}
@cindex Commands

@menu
* Options::               How to use Options.
* Response file::         How to use a @option{@@@var{file}} Response file.
* Actual date modifier::  How to use a @option{%@var{date}} Actual date modifier.
* Commands::              How to use Commands.
@end menu

This section describes all command line arguments processed by Gcal.  Four
different types of command line arguments exists.  One important type of
arguments are the @dfn{options} which control how Gcal behaves.  Other types
of arguments are the @option{%@var{date}} and the @option{@@@var{file}}
options.  The @option{%@var{date}} option sets the period Gcal shall work
on to any starting date; the @option{@@@var{file}} option preloads options
and commands from a response file.  The most important arguments are the
@dfn{commands} which control the periods Gcal respects.

@cindex Switch character, @samp{-}
@cindex @samp{-} switch character
@cindex Switch character, @samp{/}
@cindex @samp{/} switch character
@cindex Switch character, @samp{--}
@cindex @samp{--} switch character
An option is defined by a leading @dfn{switch} character; either the @samp{-}
(dash) or the @samp{/} (slash) character for traditional short-style options,
or @samp{--} for mnemonic long-style options; a command may not have a leading
switch character.  Options@footnote{Inclusive @option{%@var{date}} and
@option{@@@var{file}}@.} @strong{must} be given before commands!

@cindex Quotation of special characters
@cindex Special characters, quotation
@cindex Depreciation of special characters
@cindex Special characters, depreciation
@cindex Protection of special characters
@cindex Special characters, protection
@cindex Shell
Depending on operating system and used shell, some of the arguments and texts
given in command line must be quoted by @samp{"} or @samp{'} characters
respectively protected or depreciated by a @samp{\} character to avoid
expansion by the shell.

@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

Here is an incomplete list of characters which must potentially be protected:
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@quotation
@samp{(}, @samp{)}, @samp{<}, @samp{>}, @samp{[}, @samp{]}, @samp{@{},
@samp{@}}, @samp{\}, @samp{|}, @samp{$}, @samp{@@}, @samp{!}, @samp{&},
@samp{~}, @samp{"}, @samp{'}, @samp{`}, @samp{;}
@end quotation

@page
@node Options, Response file, Command line arguments, Command line arguments
@subsection Options
@cindex Options
@cindex @command{gcal} options
@cindex Command line options, @command{gcal}

@menu
* Common options::      How to use Common options.
* Global options::      How to use Global options.
* Calendar options::    How to use Calendar options.
* Fixed date options::  How to use Fixed date options.
@end menu

@cindex Common option class
@cindex Option class, common
@cindex Global option class
@cindex Option class, global
@cindex Calendar option class
@cindex Option class, calendar
@cindex Fixed date option class
@cindex Option class, fixed date
The options processed by Gcal can be grouped into four major option classes.
The options of the @dfn{common option class} are the standard options all GNU
software should implement at least partially.  The @dfn{global option class}
contains options which affect the program output.  The options of the
@dfn{calendar option class} control the calendar layout, and the options
of the @dfn{fixed date option class} control the fixed date layout and
intensity.

@cindex Options, short-style
@cindex Short-style option
@cindex Options, long-style
@cindex Long-style option
@cindex GNU style options
@cindex Single character options
@cindex Single command line word
Gcal supports both short-style options and GNU long-style options.
Traditional short-style options are indicated by a single switch character,
and trailed by the option character itself and perhaps a modifier or an
argument.  The most single character options@footnote{Unless they take an
argument.} can be composed into a single command line word: @option{-Ax}
is equivalent to @option{-A -x}@.  GNU long-style options are indicated
with @samp{--}, and trailed by the mnemonic option name itself and perhaps
an argument.  Long-style options and their arguments may be abbreviated if
done unambiguously.  When a long-style option takes an argument, connect
the option name and the argument with @samp{=}@.

Brackets ([ and ]) indicate in the following tables, that an option takes
an optional argument.  The @samp{|} character is used to separate several
arguments from each other.

@tbindex GNU long-style options
@tbindex Long-style options, GNU
Gcal processes the GNU long-style options in a special, non-standard way.
There are five different types of long-style options:

@enumerate 1
@item
@option{--foo}@*
Enables option @option{--foo}@.

@item
@option{--foo=@var{bar}}@*
Enables option @option{--foo} with the required argument @var{bar}@.

@item
@option{--foo@r{[}=@var{bar}@r{[|@dots{}|}@var{bar}@r{]]}}@*
Option @option{--foo} may have one @var{bar} argument.  If no argument list
is given, any argument can be given to this option.  If an argument list is
given, exactly one @var{bar} argument may be selected from the given list.
If there is no argument chosen in this case, the first @var{bar} argument of
the argument list is preselected by default.

@item
@option{--foo=@var{bar}@r{|@dots{}|}@var{bar}}@*
Option @option{--foo} requires exactly one @var{bar} argument which must be
selected from the given argument list.

@item
@option{--foo=@var{bar}@r{|@dots{}|}@var{bar}@r{|}@var{baz}}@*
Option @option{--foo} requires exactly one @var{bar} argument which must be
selected from the given @var{bar} argument list, or the alternative @var{baz}
argument.
@end enumerate

@tbindex Traditional short-style options
@tbindex Short-style options, traditional
Traditional short-style options differ as follows:

@enumerate 1
@item
@option{-x}@*
Enables option @option{-x}@.

@item
@cindex Separator character, whitespace
@cindex Whitespace separator character
@option{-x @var{bar}}@*
Enables option @option{-x} with the required argument @var{bar}@.
The @var{bar} argument may be separated by a leading @emph{whitespace}
character from the short-style option character @option{x}@.  This means,
the following notations are valid for giving an argument,
namely @option{-x @var{bar}} or @option{-x@var{bar}}@.

@item
@cindex Separator character, whitespace
@cindex Whitespace separator character
@cindex Modifier
@cindex Option modifier
@option{-x@r{[}@var{bar}@r{|@dots{}|}@var{bar}@r{]}}@*
Option @option{-x} may have one or more @var{bar} @dfn{modifier}@.  In this
sense, modifiers are one or more characters which define a special mode of
operation enabled by the @option{-x} option.  A modifier may not be separated
by a leading @emph{whitespace} character from the short-style option character.
@end enumerate

@node Common options, Global options, Options, Options
@subsubsection Common options
@cindex Common options

@table @option
@item -?
@itemx -h
@itemx --help
@arindex -?
@arindex -h
@arindex --help
@cindex Help, online
@cindex Short help text
@cindex Help text, short
Print a short usage message listing only some few of all available options,
then exit successfully.

@need 1500
@item -??
@itemx -hh
@itemx --usage@r{[}=@var{argument}@r{]}
@itemx --long-help@r{[}=@var{argument}@r{]}
@arindex -??
@arindex -hh
@arindex --usage@r{[}=@var{argument}@r{]}
@arindex --long-help@r{[}=@var{argument}@r{]}
@cindex Help, online
@cindex Extended help text
@cindex Help text, extended
@cindex Long help text
@cindex Help text, long
Print an extended usage message listing all available options,
then exit successfully.  If an @var{argument} is given and it is a valid
long-style option name, an extended help text related to the given
long-style option name is displayed only, e.g.@::

@example
--long-help=long-help
@end example

displays the extended help text for the long option @w{@option{--long-help}}@.

@arindex --usage=?
@arindex --long-help=?
@cindex List of all long-style option names
@cindex Long-style option names, list
If the @var{argument} only consists of the single @samp{?} character or is
no valid long-style option name, a list of all valid long-style option names
is displayed.

@item -L
@itemx --license
@itemx --copyleft
@itemx --copyright
@arindex -L
@arindex --license
@arindex --copyleft
@arindex --copyright
@cindex Software license, finding
@cindex Copyleft
@cindex Copyright
Print the software license message, then exit successfully.

@item -V
@itemx --version
@arindex -V
@arindex --version
@cindex Version number, finding
Print the version number and compilation options, then exit successfully.

@item --exit-status-help-non-zero
@arindex --exit-status-help-non-zero
@cindex Program exit state 127
@cindex Exit code 127
@cindex Error code 127
Set the exit state of program to 127 instead to 0, if one of the other
options of the @emph{common option class} is used.
@end table

@node Global options, Calendar options, Common options, Options
@subsubsection Global options
@cindex Global options

@table @option
@item -R @var{name}
@itemx --response-file=@var{name}
@arindex -R @var{name}
@arindex --response-file=@var{name}
@cindex Response file, creation
@cindex Environment variable, @env{GCAL}
@cindex @env{GCAL} environment variable
@vindex GCAL
@anchor{x-response-file}
Write the contents of the environment variable @env{GCAL}
(@pxref{x-GCAL, , Environment Variable @env{GCAL}}),
and then the arguments of command line (in the given order) to file
@var{name}, i.e.@: create response file @file{name}@.
@xref{Response file},
for more details.

@item -S @var{name}
@itemx --shell-script=@var{name}
@arindex -S @var{name}
@arindex --shell-script=@var{name}
@cindex Shell script, creation
@cindex Environment variable, @env{GCAL}
@cindex @env{GCAL} environment variable
@vindex GCAL
Write the contents of the environment variable @env{GCAL}
(@pxref{x-GCAL, , Environment Variable @env{GCAL}}),
and then the arguments of command line (in the given order) to file @var{name},
i.e.@: create shell script file @file{name}@.  An automatically created shell
script file is executable and calls Gcal directly with the arguments stored
in it.  You may start the shell script with other command line arguments
which are directed to Gcal, too.

@item --debug@r{[}=internal@r{|}handled@r{|}unhandled@r{|}all@r{|}abort@r{]}
@arindex @w{--debug@r{[}=internal@r{|}handled@r{|}unhandled@r{|}all@r{|}abort@r{]}}
Display some debug information.

@table @option
@item --debug=internal
@arindex --debug=internal
@anchor{x-debug-internal}
Display informational texts if program internal maxima are reached
or other conditions occurred, respectively.

@item --debug=handled
@arindex --debug=handled
Like @option{--debug=internal}, additionally display the file names
which can be processed respectively handled.

@item --debug=unhandled
@arindex --debug=unhandled
Like @option{--debug=internal}, additionally display file names
which cannot be processed respectively handled.

@item --debug=all
@arindex --debug=all
Like @option{--debug=handled} and @option{--debug=unhandled} together.

@need 1000
@item --debug=abort
@arindex --debug=abort
@anchor{x-debug-abort}
Like @option{--debug=all} and abort program with an error code if the file name
cannot be handled or other unmanageable conditions occurred, respectively.
@xref{Error Codes}.
@end table

@item -p
@itemx --pager
@arindex -p
@arindex --pager
@cindex Pager, using
@cindex Pager, external
@cindex Pager program
@cindex External pager program
@cindex Environment variable, @env{PAGER}
@cindex @env{PAGER} environment variable
@vindex PAGER
@anchor{x-pager}
Enables either an @emph{external} pager or a simple, @emph{internal} pager.
If an environment variable @env{PAGER} is set, its contents will be used for
detecting the external pager program.
@xref{x-PAGER, , Environment Variable @env{PAGER}},
for more information.

@cindex Environment variable, @env{PATH}
@cindex @env{PATH} environment variable
@vindex PATH
If no @env{PAGER} environment variable is set or if its contents is invalid,
Gcal tries to use the @command{less} pager; if this program cannot be found
during scanning the @env{PATH} environment variable, Gcal tries to use
the @command{more} pager, if this program cannot be found, the @command{pg}
pager in the same way@footnote{See the standard manual pages for
@command{less}, @command{more} and @command{pg}@.}@.
@xref{x-PATH, , Environment Variable @env{PATH}}.

@cindex Pager, internal
@cindex Internal pager, simple
If all these actions fail, Gcal will use its simple, built-in pager.
If the internal pager is used, Gcal detects the number of lines shown
before it prompts and waits for user input by using these methods:

@enumerate 1
@item
@vindex GCAL_LINES
@vindex GCAL_COLUMNS
Gcal respects the values set in the environment variables @w{@env{GCAL_LINES}}
and @w{@env{GCAL_COLUMNS}}@.
@xref{x-GCAL_LINES, , Environment Variable @env{GCAL_LINES}},
and
@ref{x-GCAL_COLUMNS, , Environment Variable @env{GCAL_COLUMNS}},
for further information.

@item
@vindex LINES
@vindex COLUMNS
If above action fails, Gcal respects the values set in the environment
variables @env{LINES} and @env{COLUMNS}@.
@xref{x-LINES, , Environment Variable @env{LINES}},
and
@ref{x-COLUMNS, , Environment Variable @env{COLUMNS}},
for more details.

@item
@vindex TERM
If above action fails, Gcal respects the values set in the
@file{termcap}@footnote{See the standard manual pages for Termcap.}
file which refers to the terminal used
(@pxref{x-TERM, , Environment Variable @env{TERM}})@.
This step is only done on systems which support the use of Termcap by default.

On @w{MS-DOS}, @w{OS/2} and some other operating systems, Gcal uses a system
dependent @emph{low-level} function and respects the reported values.

@item
If all above actions have failed, Gcal uses default values@footnote{Either
23 or 24 lines, and 80 columns.}@.
@end enumerate

@item -H yes
@itemx --force-highlighting
@itemx --highlighting=yes
@arindex -H yes
@arindex --force-highlighting
@arindex --highlighting=yes
@cindex Highlighting sequences, forcing
@cindex Forcing highlighting sequences
@cindex Redirection
@cindex Pipelining
If the output of the program is redirected@footnote{This means, sent
to another device.} or piped@footnote{This means, used as an input data
stream for another program.}, the highlighting sequences are @strong{not}
automatically converted into the according marking characters, they remain
unchanged.  This option takes no effect if the output of the program is sent
by means of electronic mail.
@xref{x-mail, , Global option @option{--mail@r{[}=@var{address}@r{]}}}.

@item -H no
@itemx --disable-highlighting
@itemx --highlighting=no
@arindex -H no
@arindex --disable-highlighting
@arindex --highlighting=no
@cindex Highlighting sequences, disabling
@cindex Marking characters, disabling
@cindex Disable highlighting sequences
@cindex Disable marking characters
Disable highlighting sequence / marking character pairs of
current day, holiday or text explicitly.

@item -H @var{text}
@itemx --highlighting=@var{text}
@arindex -H @var{text}
@arindex --highlighting=@var{text}
@cindex Highlighting sequences, setting
@cindex Set highlighting sequences
@cindex Marking characters, setting
@cindex Set marking characters
@cindex @samp{:} separator character
@cindex Separator character, @samp{:}
@cindex Sequence of control characters
@cindex Control character sequence
@cindex Escape sequence
@anchor{x-highlighting}
Set highlighting sequence / marking character pairs explicitly.  In this sense,
@dfn{highlighting} sequences are control character sequences which cause a
color or intensity switch in output text.  Typical control character sequences
are the @acronym{ANSI} escape sequences which have a leading escape character,
and trailing more characters that define the type of the @acronym{ANSI} escape
sequence.  In this sense, @dfn{marking} characters are single, printable
characters which lead and trail the output text.

The @var{text} argument must be a (@samp{:}) colon-separated text which is
structured in this way:
@w{@var{seq1_start}:@var{seq1_end}:@var{seq2_start}:@var{seq2_end}}@.
The @strong{first} sequence is used for highlighting/marking an actual day,
the @strong{second} for a holiday.  The sequences must be given in form of
a sequence pair; @w{@var{seq?_start}} enables the highlighting/marking,
@w{@var{seq?_end}} disables it.  Only two sequence pairs will be processed,
others are ignored.  Either highlighting sequence pairs or marking character
pairs may be defined, i.e.@: using them both in a mixed couple is not
permitted!

@need 1000
For example:

@quotation
@option{-H \x20:\x20:\x1:#} respectively@*
@option{--highlighting=\x20:\x20:\x1:#}@*
marks the actual day like @w{@samp{\x20@var{actual date}\x20}}@footnote{This
means with a leading and a trailing blank.} and the holiday date like
@w{@samp{\x1@var{holiday date}#}} using the given marking characters.
@end quotation

@quotation
@option{-H \x1b[34;42m:\x1b[0;40m} or@*
@option{-H \033[34;42m:\033[0;40m} or@*
@option{-H \E[34;42m:\E[0;40m}@*
defines a starting @acronym{ANSI} escape highlighting sequence
@w{@samp{\x1b[34;42m}} used for actual day and ending @acronym{ANSI}
escape highlighting sequence @w{@samp{\x1b[0;40m}} with no given highlighting
sequence for holidays, so default highlighting sequences for holidays
are used (non-given entries are always skipped)@.  Please note the last
abstract of this text part which informs you more detailed of this context.
@xref{x-GCALANSI, , Environment Variable @env{GCALANSI}},
too.
@end quotation

Control code definitions may contain any printable characters.  Non-printable
characters may be encoded in octal or hexadecimal notation.  The abbreviation
@samp{\E} directly encodes the escape character (octal @code{\033} respectively
hexadecimal @code{\x1B})@.

A character can be encoded octal by typing @samp{\@var{nnn}}
@w{(backslash-octal digit(s))}, where @var{n} must be a valid octal digit
@w{(0@dots{}7)}@.  Normally, three octal digits must be given.  If the octal
character code consists of one or two octal digits, leading zeroes must be
added, except the case, where the encoded octal character is given at last
in the single sequence.

A character can be encoded hexadecimal by typing @samp{\x@var{nn}}
(@w{backslash-x} hexadecimal digit(s)), where @var{n} must be a valid
hexadecimal digit @w{(0@dots{}9A@dots{}Fa@dots{}f)}@.  Normally, two
hexadecimal digits must be given.  If the hexadecimal character code
consists of one hexadecimal digit, a leading zero must be added, except
the case, where the encoded hexadecimal character is given at last in
the single sequence.

@cindex Separator character, @samp{:}
@cindex @samp{:} separator character
If the sequence separator character, thus the @samp{:} (colon) character
itself, is used as a marking character, it must be encoded either octal
by @code{\072} or hexadecimal by @code{\x3A}@.

@cindex C Preprocessor symbol @w{USE_PAGER}
@cindex Redirection of output
@cindex Output, redirection
@cindex Pipelining of output
@cindex Output, pipelining
If the C Preprocessor symbol @w{@code{USE_PAGER}} was defined and the
output of the program is redirected or used in a pipeline, the highlighting
sequences are automatically converted into the according marking characters;
if @w{@code{USE_PAGER}} was not defined, they remain untouched.

@cindex Environment variable, @env{GCALANSI}
@cindex @env{GCALANSI} environment variable
@vindex GCALANSI
Incomplete or non-given highlighting sequences will be replaced by internal
default @acronym{ANSI} escape highlighting sequences if a @env{GCALANSI}
environment variable is defined; otherwise completely replaced by their
according marking characters.
@xref{x-GCALANSI, , Environment Variable @env{GCALANSI}}.

@page
@item --mail@r{[}=@var{address}@r{]}
@arindex --mail@r{[}=@var{address}@r{]}
@cindex Mail, sending
@cindex Sending eMail
@cindex EMail, option
@cindex Electronic Mail
@anchor{x-mail}
Send Gcal's output via @command{mail}@footnote{See the standard manual pages
for @command{mail}@.} program to the given @var{address}, e.g.@::

@example
--mail=esken@@gmx.net
@end example

@cindex Methods of sending Mail
@cindex Mail, methods of sending
@cindex EMail, methods of sending
If no @var{address} is given, Gcal tries to send the eMail
by using the following methods:

@enumerate 1
@item
@cindex Environment variable, @env{MAILTO}
@cindex @env{MAILTO} environment variable
@vindex MAILTO
If an environment variable @env{MAILTO} is defined and set, the eMail
is send to the address which is listed in this environment variable.
@xref{x-MAILTO, , Environment Variable @env{MAILTO}},
for more information.

@item
@cindex Environment variable, @env{USER}
@cindex @env{USER} environment variable
@vindex USER
If above action fails, and if an environment variable @env{USER} is
defined and set, the eMail is send to the address which is listed in
this environment variable.
@xref{x-USER, , Environment Variable @env{USER}},
for more information.

@item
@cindex Environment variable, @env{LOGNAME}
@cindex @env{LOGNAME} environment variable
@vindex LOGNAME
If above action fails, and if an environment variable @env{LOGNAME} is
defined and set, the eMail is send to the address which is listed in
this environment variable.
@xref{x-LOGNAME, , Environment Variable @env{LOGNAME}},
for more information.

@item
If all above actions have failed, no eMail is send.
@end enumerate

@cindex Mail, empty message body
@cindex EMail, empty message body
@cindex Empty message body in Mail
Generally, Gcal does not send electronic Mails whose message body is empty!
An informational message will be shown on the @emph{standard error channel}
if this case occurs.

@cindex Resource file, limitations
@cindex Limitations in a resource file
All highlighting sequences produced by Gcal itself are always disabled
respectively automatically converted into the according marking characters
if an eMail must be send; no matter if the @option{--force-highlighting}
option was given or not.  This behavior of Gcal is an imperative necessity,
because it is possible that the @command{mail} program cannot perform the
mailing correctly.  Please pay attention in this context to the further
explanations concerning the limitations of the @emph{text part} of a
resource file line
(@pxref{Text part of a line})@.

@cindex Environment variable, @env{MAILPROG}
@cindex @env{MAILPROG} environment variable
@vindex MAILPROG
If an environment variable @env{MAILPROG} is defined and set, its contents
will be used as the program name of the mailer instead of the standard
name @command{mail}@.
@xref{x-MAILPROG, , Environment Variable @env{MAILPROG}},
for more information.
@end table

@need 2000
@node Calendar options, Fixed date options, Global options, Options
@subsubsection Calendar options
@cindex Calendar options

@table @option
@item -n@r{|}N@r{[}-@r{]}
@itemx --holiday-list@r{[}=long@r{|}short@r{]}
@itemx --descending-holiday-list@r{[}=long@r{|}short@r{]}
@arindex -n@r{|}N@r{[}-@r{]}
@arindex --holiday-list@r{[}=long@r{|}short@r{]}
@arindex --descending-holiday-list@r{[}=long@r{|}short@r{]}
@cindex Eternal holiday list, option
@anchor{x-holiday-list}
Display the eternal holiday list.  By default, there are no entries in
the eternal holiday list.  You have to choose country specific holidays or
holidays from other calendar systems to provide the eternal holiday list
with entries.
@xref{Eternal Holidays},
and
@ref{x-cc-holidays, , Calendar option @option{--cc-holidays=@var{cc}@r{[}+@r{@dots{}]}}},
for additional information.

@need 1000
@table @option
@item -n
@itemx --holiday-list=long
@arindex -n
@arindex --holiday-list=long
Display all holidays of eternal holiday list ---this means, all legal
holidays and all further memorial days--- sorted in ascending order.

@need 1000
@item -n-
@itemx --descending-holiday-list=long
@arindex -n-
@arindex --descending-holiday-list=long
Display all holidays of eternal holiday list ---this means, all legal
holidays and all further memorial days--- sorted in descending order.

@need 1000
@item -N
@itemx --holiday-list=short
@arindex -N
@arindex --holiday-list=short
Display legal holidays only of eternal holiday list,
sorted in ascending order.

@need 1000
@item -N-
@itemx --descending-holiday-list=short
@arindex -N-
@arindex --descending-holiday-list=short
Display legal holidays only of eternal holiday list,
sorted in descending order.
@end table

@need 2000
@item -G
@itemx --suppress-holiday-list-separator
@arindex -G
@arindex --suppress-holiday-list-separator
@cindex Eternal holiday list, suppression of leading blank line
@cindex Suppress leading blank line of eternal holiday list
Suppress displaying of the blank line which is always leading an eternal
holiday list.

@item -X
@itemx --exclude-holiday-list-title
@arindex -X
@arindex --exclude-holiday-list-title
@cindex Eternal holiday list, suppression of title text
@cindex Suppress title text of eternal holiday list
Suppress the title text line of the eternal holiday list.

@item --astronomical-holidays
@arindex --astronomical-holidays
@cindex Eternal holiday list, astronomical data
@cindex Astronomical data in eternal holiday list
@cindex Full Moon phase
@cindex Moon phase, Full
@cindex New Moon phase
@cindex Moon phase, New
@cindex Waning Half Moon phase
@cindex Moon phase, waning Half
@cindex Waxing Half Moon phase
@cindex Moon phase, waxing Half
@cindex Solar eclipse
@cindex Eclipse, solar
@cindex Lunar eclipse
@cindex Eclipse, lunar
@cindex Winter solstice
@cindex Solstice, winter
@cindex Summer solstice
@cindex Solstice, summer
@cindex Vernal equinox
@cindex Equinox, vernal
@cindex Autumnal equinox
@cindex Equinox, autumnal
@anchor{x-astronomical-holidays}
Provide the eternal holiday list additionally with some astronomical data,
and that the Full and New Moon phases, waning and waxing Half Moon phases,
solar and lunar eclipses, and the solstices and equinoxes.
@xref{x-time-offset, , Calendar option @option{--time-offset=@var{argument}}},
how to change the timezone respectively base time for which the astronomical
data is calculated.

@item --bahai-holidays
@arindex --bahai-holidays
@cindex Eternal holiday list, Bah@'a'@`i holidays
@cindex Bah@'a'@`i holidays in eternal holiday list
@anchor{x-bahai-holidays}
Provide the eternal holiday list additionally with Bah@'a'@`i
holidays (only for dates after @acronym{AD} 1843)@.

@item --celtic-holidays
@arindex --celtic-holidays
@cindex Eternal holiday list, Celtic holidays
@cindex Celtic holidays in eternal holiday list
Provide the eternal holiday list additionally with Celtic holidays.
@xref{x-time-offset, , Calendar option @option{--time-offset=@var{argument}}},
how to change the timezone for which the Celtic holidays are calculated.

@item --chinese-flexible-holidays
@arindex --chinese-flexible-holidays
@cindex Eternal holiday list, holidays from the flexible Chinese calendar
@cindex Holidays from the flexible Chinese calendar in eternal holiday list
@anchor{x-chinese-flexible-holidays}
Provide the eternal holiday list additionally with Chinese holidays, that are
determined in a flexible manner (only for dates after @acronym{AD} 1644)@.
@xref{x-time-offset, , Calendar option @option{--time-offset=@var{argument}}},
how to change the timezone for which the Chinese holidays are calculated in
a flexible manner.
@xref{Preface},
for further details.

@item --chinese-holidays
@arindex --chinese-holidays
@cindex Eternal holiday list, Chinese holidays
@cindex Chinese holidays in eternal holiday list
@anchor{x-chinese-holidays}
Provide the eternal holiday list additionally with Chinese holidays
(only for dates after @acronym{AD} 1644)@.  For dates until @acronym{AD} 1928
all computations done are depending fixed on Beijing local time, for later
dates fixed on the timezone @w{GMT-8}@.
@xref{Preface},
for further details.

@item --christian-holidays
@arindex --christian-holidays
@cindex Eternal holiday list, Christian holidays
@cindex Christian holidays in eternal holiday list
Provide the eternal holiday list additionally with Christian holidays.

@item --hebrew-holidays
@arindex --hebrew-holidays
@cindex Eternal holiday list, Hebrew holidays
@cindex Hebrew holidays in eternal holiday list
Provide the eternal holiday list additionally with Hebrew holidays.

@item --islamic-civil-holidays
@arindex --islamic-civil-holidays
@cindex Eternal holiday list, Islamic holidays
@cindex Islamic holidays in eternal holiday list
@anchor{x-islamic-civil-holidays}
Provide the eternal holiday list additionally with Islamic holidays
(only for dates after @acronym{AD} 621), that are based on the civil
Islamic calendar.
@xref{Preface},
for further details.

@item --japanese-flexible-holidays
@arindex --japanese-flexible-holidays
@cindex Eternal holiday list, holidays from the flexible Japanese calendar
@cindex Holidays from the flexible Japanese calendar in eternal holiday list
@anchor{x-japanese-flexible-holidays}
Provide the eternal holiday list additionally with Japanese holidays, that are
determined in a flexible manner (only for dates after @acronym{AD} 1644)@.
@xref{x-time-offset, , Calendar option @option{--time-offset=@var{argument}}},
how to change the timezone for which the Japanese holidays are calculated
in a flexible manner.

@item --japanese-holidays
@arindex --japanese-holidays
@cindex Eternal holiday list, Japanese holidays
@cindex Japanese holidays in eternal holiday list
@anchor{x-japanese-holidays}
Provide the eternal holiday list additionally with Japanese holidays
(only for dates after @acronym{AD} 1644)@.  For dates until @acronym{AD} 1887
all computations done are depending fixed on Beijing local time, for later
dates fixed on the timezone @w{GMT-9}@.

@item --multicultural-new-year-holidays
@arindex --multicultural-new-year-holidays
@cindex Eternal holiday list, multicultural New Year holidays
@cindex Multicultural New Year holidays in eternal holiday list
Provide the eternal holiday list additionally with multicultural
New Year holidays.
@xref{x-time-offset, , Calendar option @option{--time-offset=@var{argument}}},
how to change the timezone for which the multicultural New Year holidays
are calculated.

@item --orthodox-new-holidays
@arindex --orthodox-new-holidays
@cindex Eternal holiday list, Orthodox new calendar holidays
@cindex Orthodox new calendar holidays in eternal holiday list
Provide the eternal holiday list additionally with Orthodox new calendar
holidays, and it is assumed that the Gregorian Reformation has occurred
from 10th till 22nd March 1924.
@xref{x-orthodox-calendar, , Calendar option @option{--orthodox-calendar}},
for further details.

@item --orthodox-old-holidays
@arindex --orthodox-old-holidays
@cindex Eternal holiday list, Orthodox old calendar holidays
@cindex Orthodox old calendar holidays in eternal holiday list
Provide the eternal holiday list additionally with Orthodox new calendar
holidays, and it is assumed that the Gregorian Reformation has occurred
from 10th till 22nd March 1924.
@xref{x-orthodox-calendar, , Calendar option @option{--orthodox-calendar}},
for further details.

@item --persian-jalaali-holidays
@arindex --persian-jalaali-holidays
@cindex Eternal holiday list, Persian Jalaali holidays
@cindex Persian Jalaali holidays in eternal holiday list
@anchor{x-persian-jalaali-holidays}
Provide the eternal holiday list additionally with Persian holidays
(only for dates after @acronym{AD} 621), which are based on the
Persian @emph{Jalaali} calendar.  All computations done are depending
on the timezone @w{GMT-3.5}@.

@item --zodiacal-marker-holidays
@arindex --zodical-marker-holidays
@cindex Eternal holiday list, zodiacal marker holidays
@cindex Zodiacal marker holidays in eternal holiday list
Provide the eternal holiday list additionally with zodiacal marker holidays,
i.e.@: the dates when the Sun enters a zodiac sign or when the Sun reaches
the @w{turning-point} in the zodiac sign.
@xref{x-time-offset, , Calendar option @option{--time-offset=@var{argument}}},
how to change the timezone for which the zodiacal marker holidays
are calculated.

@need 1000
@item -q @var{cc}@r{[}_@var{tt}@r{][}+@r{@dots{}]}
@itemx --cc-holidays=@var{cc}@r{[}_@var{tt}@r{][}+@r{@dots{}]}
@arindex -q @var{cc}@r{[}_@var{tt}@r{][}+@r{@dots{}]}
@arindex --cc-holidays=@var{cc}@r{[}_@var{tt}@r{][}+@r{@dots{}]}
@cindex Eternal holiday list, country specific holidays
@cindex Country specific holidays in eternal holiday list
@anchor{x-cc-holidays}
Provide the eternal holiday list additionally with country specific holidays.
Furthermore, all additionally highlighted days of the eternal holiday list
are highlighted in the calendar sheets, too.

@cindex @acronym{ISO}-3166
@cindex Country code
The @var{cc} argument is a two-letter country code as defined by the
@acronym{ISO}-3166@footnote{@acronym{ISO} is the abbreviation of
@cite{International Organization for Standardization}@.} like @samp{BE} for
Belgium or @samp{ES} for Spain.  See the pertinent literature for more details.

@cindex Territory code
In some cases, such a country code may be trailed by a two-letter territory
code @var{tt} for better specification, which is separated by a @samp{_}
character from the country code.

@cindex Separator character, @samp{+}
@cindex @samp{+} separator character
You can use more than one country code @w{@var{cc}@r{[}_@var{tt}@r{]}}
by connecting them with a @samp{+} character, e.g.@::

@quotation
@option{--cc-holidays=be+Fr+IT} resp.,@*
@option{-q be+Fr+IT}
@end quotation

includes all the country specific holidays given in the preceding argument
into the eternal holiday list, i.e.@: Belgian, French and Italian holidays.

@tbindex Country specific holidays
@tbindex Holidays, country specific
Actually, Gcal respects the following country codes, at which countries
marked by a @samp{#} character have only an incomplete recording of holidays:
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@table @code
@item AD
Andorra

@item AE
United Arab Emirates

@item AF
Afghanistan

@item AG
Antigua and Barbuda

@item AI
Anguilla

@item AL
Albania

@item AM
Armenia

@item AN_BO
Netherlands Antilles/Bonaire

@item AN_CU
Netherlands Antilles/Cura@,{c}ao

@item AN_MA
Netherlands Antilles/St Maarten

@item AN_SA
Netherlands Antilles/Saba and Statia

@item AO
Angola #

@item AR
Argentina

@item AS
American Samoa

@item AT
Austria

@item AU_CT
Australia/Canberra

@item AU_NT
Australia/Northern Territory

@item AU_QU
Australia/Queensland

@item AU_SA
Australia/Southern Australia

@item AU_SW
Australia/New South Wales

@item AU_TA
Australia/Tasmania

@item AU_VI
Australia/Victoria

@item AU_WA
Australia/Western Australia

@item AW
Aruba

@item AZ
Azerbaijan

@item BA
Bosnia-Herzegovina

@item BB
Barbados

@item BD
Bangladesh #

@item BE
Belgium

@item BF
Burkina Faso

@item BG
Bulgaria

@item BH
Bahrain

@item BI
Burundi #

@item BJ
Benin #

@item BM
Bermuda

@item BN
Brunei

@item BO
Bolivia

@item BR
Brazil

@item BS
Bahamas

@item BT
Bhutan #

@item BV
Bouvet Island

@item BW
Botswana

@item BY
Belarus

@item BZ
Belize

@item CA_AL
Canada/Alberta

@item CA_BC
Canada/British Columbia

@item CA_MA
Canada/Manitoba

@item CA_NB
Canada/New Brunswick

@item CA_NF
Canada/Newfoundland and Labrador

@item CA_NS
Canada/Nova Scotia

@item CA_NW
Canada/Northwest Territories

@item CA_ON
Canada/Ontario

@item CA_PE
Canada/Prince Edward Island

@item CA_QU
Canada/Qu@'ebec

@item CA_SA
Canada/Saskatchewan

@item CA_YU
Canada/Yukon

@item CC
Cocos Islands (Keeling)

@item CD
Democratic Republic of Congo #

@item CF
Central African Republic #

@item CG
Republic of Congo #

@item CH_AG
Switzerland/Aargau

@item CH_AI
Switzerland/Appenzell Innerrhoden

@item CH_AR
Switzerland/Appenzell Ausserrhoden

@item CH_BE
Switzerland/Bern

@item CH_BL
Switzerland/Basel-Land

@item CH_BS
Switzerland/Basel-Stadt

@item CH_FR
Switzerland/Fribourg

@item CH_GE
Switzerland/Gen@`eve

@item CH_GL
Switzerland/Glarus

@item CH_GR
Switzerland/Graub@"unden

@item CH_JU
Switzerland/Jura

@item CH_LU
Switzerland/Luzern

@item CH_NE
Switzerland/Neuch@^atel

@item CH_NW
Switzerland/Nidwalden

@item CH_OW
Switzerland/Obwalden

@item CH_SG
Switzerland/St Gallen

@item CH_SH
Switzerland/Schaffhausen

@item CH_SO
Switzerland/Solothurn

@item CH_SZ
Switzerland/Schwyz

@item CH_TG
Switzerland/Thurgau

@item CH_TI
Switzerland/Ticino

@item CH_UR
Switzerland/Uri

@item CH_VD
Switzerland/Vaud

@item CH_VS
Switzerland/Valais

@item CH_ZG
Switzerland/Zug

@item CH_ZH
Switzerland/Z@"urich

@item CI
C@^ote d'Ivoire

@item CK
Cook Islands

@item CL
Chile

@item CM
Cameroon

@item CN
China

@item CO
Colombia

@item CR
Costa Rica

@item CU
Cuba

@item CV
Cape Verde

@item CX
Christmas Islands

@item CY
Cyprus

@item CZ
Czech Republic

@item DE_BB
Germany/Brandenburg

@item DE_BE
Germany/Berlin

@item DE_BW
Germany/Baden-W@"urttemberg

@item DE_BY
Germany/Bavaria

@item DE_HB
Germany/Bremen

@item DE_HE
Germany/Hesse

@item DE_HH
Germany/Hamburg

@item DE_MV
Germany/Mecklenburg-West Pomerania

@item DE_NI
Germany/Lower Saxony

@item DE_NW
Germany/North Rhine-Westphalia

@item DE_RP
Germany/Rhineland Palatinate

@item DE_SH
Germany/Schleswig-Holstein

@item DE_SL
Germany/Saar

@item DE_SN
Germany/Saxony

@item DE_ST
Germany/Saxony-Anhalt

@item DE_TH
Germany/Thuringia

@item DJ
Djibouti

@item DK
Denmark

@item DM
Dominica

@item DO
Dominican Republic

@item DZ
Algeria

@item EC
Ecuador

@item EE
Estonia

@item EG
Egypt

@item EH
Western Sahara

@item ER
Eritrea

@item ES
Spain

@item ET
Ethiopia

@item FI
Finland

@item FJ
Fiji #

@item FK
Falkland Islands (Malvinas)

@item FM
Federated States of Micronesia

@item FO
Faroes

@item FR
France

@item GA
Gabon #

@item GB_EN
Great Britain/England and Wales

@item GB_NI
Great Britain/Northern Ireland

@item GB_SL
Great Britain/Scotland

@item GD
Grenada

@item GE
Georgia

@item GF
French Guiana

@item GH
Ghana

@item GI
Gibraltar

@item GL
Greenland

@item GM
Gambia

@item GN
Guinea

@item GP
Guadeloupe

@item GQ
Equatorial Guinea

@item GR
Greece

@item GS
South Georgia and South Sandwich Islands

@item GT
Guatemala

@item GU
Guam

@item GW
Guinea-Bissau #

@item GY
Guyana #

@item HK
Hong Kong

@item HM
Heard and Mc Donald Islands

@item HN
Honduras

@item HR
Croatia

@item HT
Haiti

@item HU
Hungary

@item ID
Indonesia #

@item IE
Ireland

@item IL
Israel

@item IN
India #

@item IQ
Iraq

@item IR
Islamic Republic of Iran

@item IS
Iceland

@item IT
Italy

@item JM
Jamaica

@item JO
Jordan

@item JP
Japan

@item KE
Kenya #

@item KG
Kyrgyzstan

@item KH
Cambodia #

@item KI
Kiribati #

@item KM
Comoros

@item KN
St Kitts and Nevis

@item KP
Democratic People's Republic of Korea #

@item KR
Republic of Korea

@item KW
Kuwait

@item KY
Cayman Islands

@item KZ
Kazakhstan

@item LA
Laos People's Democratic Republic #

@item LB
Lebanon

@item LC
St Lucia

@item LI
Liechtenstein

@item LK
Sri Lanka #

@item LR
Liberia

@item LS
Lesotho

@item LT
Lithuania

@item LU
Luxembourg

@item LV
Latvia

@item LY
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya (Libya)

@item MA
Morocco

@item MC
Monaco

@item MD
Republic of Moldova

@item MG
Madagascar #

@item MH
Marshall Islands

@item MK
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia

@item ML
Mali

@item MN
Mongolia #

@item MO
Macau

@item MP
Northern Marian Islands (Saipan)

@item MQ
Martinique

@item MR
Mauritania

@item MS
Montserrat

@item MT
Malta

@item MU
Mauritius

@item MV
Maldives

@item MW
Malawi

@item MX
Mexico

@item MY
Malaysia #

@item MZ
Mozambique

@item NA
Namibia

@item NC
New Caledonia

@item NE
Niger

@item NF
Norfolk Island

@item NG
Nigeria

@item NI
Nicaragua

@item NL
Netherlands

@item NM
Myanmar (Burma) #

@item NO
Norway

@item NP
Nepal #

@item NR
Nauru

@item NU
Niue

@item NZ
New Zealand

@item OM
Oman

@item PA
Panama

@item PE
Peru

@item PF
French Polynesia

@item PG
Papua New Guinea

@item PH
Philippines

@item PK
Pakistan

@item PL
Poland

@item PM
Saint-Pierre and Miquelon

@item PN
Pitcairn

@item PR
Puerto Rico

@item PT
Portugal

@item PW
Palau

@item PY
Paraguay

@item QA
Qatar

@item RE
R@'eunion

@item RO
Romania

@item RU
Russian Federation

@item RW
Rwanda

@item SA
Saudi Arabia

@item SB
Solomon Islands

@item SC
Seychellen

@item SD
Sudan

@item SE
Sweden

@item SG
Singapore #

@item SH
St Helena

@item SI
Slovenia

@item SJ
Svalbard and Jan Mayen Islands

@item SK
Slovakia

@item SL
Sierra Leone

@item SM
San Marino

@item SN
Senegal

@item SO
Somalia

@item SR
Suriname #

@item ST
Sao Tom@'e and Principe

@item SV
El Salvador

@item SY
Syrian Arab Republic (Syria)

@item SZ
Swaziland

@item TC
Turks and Caicos Islands

@item TD
Chad

@item TG
Togo #

@item TH
Thailand #

@item TJ
Tajikistan

@item TK
Tokelau

@item TM
Turkmenistan

@item TN
Tunisia

@item TO
Tonga

@item TR
Turkey

@item TT
Trinidad and Tobago #

@item TV
Tuvalu

@item TW
Taiwan

@item TZ
Tanzania

@item UA
Ukraine

@item UG
Uganda

@item US_AK
United States/Alaska

@item US_AL
United States/Alabama

@item US_AR
United States/Arkansas

@item US_AZ
United States/Arizona

@item US_CA
United States/California

@item US_CO
United States/Colorado

@item US_CT
United States/Connecticut

@item US_DC
United States/District of Columbia

@item US_DE
United States/Delaware

@item US_FL
United States/Florida

@item US_GA
United States/Georgia

@item US_HI
United States/Hawaii

@item US_IA
United States/Iowa

@item US_ID
United States/Idaho

@item US_IL
United States/Illinois

@item US_IN
United States/Indiana

@item US_KS
United States/Kansas

@item US_KY
United States/Kentucky

@item US_LA
United States/Louisiana

@item US_MA
United States/Massachusetts

@item US_MD
United States/Maryland

@item US_ME
United States/Maine

@item US_MI
United States/Michigan

@item US_MN
United States/Minnesota

@item US_MO
United States/Missouri

@item US_MS
United States/Mississippi

@item US_MT
United States/Montana

@item US_NC
United States/North Carolina

@item US_ND
United States/North Dakota

@item US_NE
United States/Nebraska

@item US_NH
United States/New Hampshire

@item US_NJ
United States/New Jersey

@item US_NM
United States/New Mexico

@item US_NV
United States/Nevada

@item US_NY
United States/New York

@item US_OH
United States/Ohio

@item US_OK
United States/Oklahoma

@item US_OR
United States/Oregon

@item US_PA
United States/Pennsylvania

@item US_RI
United States/Rhode Island

@item US_SC
United States/South Carolina

@item US_SD
United States/South Dakota

@item US_TN
United States/Tennessee

@item US_TX
United States/Texas

@item US_UT
United States/Utah

@item US_VA
United States/Virginia

@item US_VT
United States/Vermont

@item US_WA
United States/Washington

@item US_WI
United States/Wisconsin

@item US_WV
United States/West Virginia

@item US_WY
United States/Wyoming

@item UY
Uruguay

@item UZ
Uzbekistan

@item VC
St Vincent and Grenadines

@item VE
Venezuela

@item VG
British Virgin Islands

@item VI
U.@:S.@: Virgin Islands

@item VN
Viet Nam

@item VU
Vanuatu

@item WF
Wallis and Futuna Islands

@item WS
Samoa

@item YE
Yemen

@item YT
Mayotte

@item YU
Serbia and Montenegro

@item ZA
South Africa

@item ZM
Zambia

@item ZW
Zimbabwe
@end table

@item --bahai-months
@arindex --bahai-months
@cindex Eternal holiday list, months from Bah@'a'@`i calendar
@cindex Months from the Bah@'a'@`i calendar in eternal holiday list
Provide the eternal holiday list additionally with the starting dates of the
common and leap months, as they result from the Bah@'a'@`i calendar.
@xref{x-bahai-holidays, , Calendar option @option{--bahai-holidays}},
for further details.

@item --chinese-flexible-months
@arindex --chinese-flexible-months
@cindex Eternal holiday list, months from flexible Chinese calendar
@cindex Months from the flexible Chinese calendar in eternal holiday list
Provide the eternal holiday list additionally with the starting dates of the
common and leap months, as they result from the Chinese calendar, that is
determined in a flexible manner.
@xref{x-chinese-flexible-holidays, , Calendar option @option{--chinese-flexible-holidays}},
for further details.

@item --chinese-months
@arindex --chinese-months
@cindex Eternal holiday list, months from the Chinese calendar
@cindex Months from the Chinese calendar in eternal holiday list
Provide the eternal holiday list additionally with the starting dates of the
common and leap months, as they result from the Chinese calendar.
@xref{x-chinese-holidays, , Calendar option @option{--chinese-holidays}},
for further details.

@item --coptic-months
@arindex --coptic-months
@cindex Eternal holiday list, months from the Coptic calendar
@cindex Months from the Coptic calendar in eternal holiday list
Provide the eternal holiday list additionally with the starting dates of the
common and leap months, as they result from the Coptic calendar
(only for dates after @acronym{AD} 283)@.

@item --ethiopic-months
@arindex --ethiopic-months
@cindex Eternal holiday list, months from the Ethiopic calendar
@cindex Months from the Ethiopic calendar in eternal holiday list
Provide the eternal holiday list additionally with the starting dates of the
common and leap months, as they result from the Ethiopic calendar.

@item --french-revolutionary-months
@arindex --french-revolutionary-months
@cindex Eternal holiday list, months from the French Revolutionary calendar
@cindex Months from the French Revolutionary calendar in eternal holiday list
Provide the eternal holiday list additionally with the starting dates of the
common and leap months, as they result from the French Revolutionary calendar
(only for dates after @acronym{AD} 1791)@.

@item --hebrew-months
@arindex --hebrew-months
@cindex Eternal holiday list, months from the Hebrew calendar
@cindex Months from the Hebrew calendar in eternal holiday list
Provide the eternal holiday list additionally with the starting dates of the
common and leap months, as they result from the Hebrew calendar.

@item --indian-civil-months
@arindex --indian-civil-months
@cindex Eternal holiday list, months from the civil Indian calendar
@cindex Months from the civil Indian calendar in eternal holiday list
Provide the eternal holiday list additionally with the starting dates of the
common and leap months, as they result from the civil Indian calendar
(only for dates after @acronym{AD} 1956)@.

@item --islamic-civil-months
@arindex --islamic-civil-months
@cindex Eternal holiday list, months from the civil Islamic calendar
@cindex Months from the civil Islamic calendar in eternal holiday list
Provide the eternal holiday list additionally with the starting dates of the
common and leap months, as they result from the civil Islamic calendar.
@xref{x-islamic-civil-holidays, , Calendar option @option{--islamic-civil-holidays}},
for further details.

@item --japanese-flexible-months
@arindex --japanese-flexible-months
@cindex Eternal holiday list, months from flexible Japanese calendar
@cindex Months from the flexible Japanese calendar in eternal holiday list
Provide the eternal holiday list additionally with the starting dates of the
common and leap months, as they result from the Japanese calendar, that is
determined in a flexible manner.
@xref{x-japanese-flexible-holidays, , Calendar option @option{--japanese-flexible-holidays}},
for further details.

@item --japanese-months
@arindex --japanese-months
@cindex Eternal holiday list, months from the Japanese calendar
@cindex Months from the Japanese calendar in eternal holiday list
Provide the eternal holiday list additionally with the starting dates of the
common and leap months, as they result from the Japanese calendar.
@xref{x-japanese-holidays, , Calendar option @option{--japanese-holidays}},
for further details.

@item --old-armenic-months
@arindex --old-armenic-months
@cindex Eternal holiday list, months from the Old-Armenic calendar
@cindex Months from the Old-Armenic calendar in eternal holiday list
Provide the eternal holiday list additionally with the starting dates of the
common and leap months, as they result from the Old-Armenic calendar
(only for dates after @acronym{AD} 551)@.

@item --old-egyptic-months
@arindex --old-egyptic-months
@cindex Eternal holiday list, months from the Old-Egyptic calendar
@cindex Months from the Old-Egyptic calendar in eternal holiday list
Provide the eternal holiday list additionally with the starting dates of the
common and leap months, as they result from the Old-Egyptic calendar.

@item --persian-jalaali-months
@arindex --persian-jalaali-months
@cindex Eternal holiday list, months from the Persian Jalaali calendar
@cindex Months from the Persian Jalaali calendar in eternal holiday list
Provide the eternal holiday list additionally with the starting dates of the
common and leap months, as they result from the Persian @emph{Jalaali}
calendar.
@xref{x-persian-jalaali-holidays, , Calendar option @option{--persian-jalaali-holidays}},
for further details.

@item -i@r{[}-@r{]}
@itemx --type=special@r{|}standard
@arindex -i@r{[}-@r{]}
@arindex -i
@arindex --type=special@r{|}standard
@cindex Standard calendar format
@cindex Special calendar format
@cindex Calendar format, standard
@cindex Calendar format, special
@anchor{x-type}
To obtain the @dfn{standard calendar format}@footnote{Similar the
@w{@acronym{BSD}-@command{cal}} program.}, either start Gcal omitting
the @w{@option{-i@r{[}-@r{]}}} option because it is set by default,
@ref{Internationalization, , Aspects in Internationalization},
or start Gcal with the @option{-i-} respectively @w{@option{--type=standard}}
option:

@example
@group
@cartouche
$ gcal -i-
@print{}
@print{}    September 1994
@print{} Su Mo Tu We Th Fr Sa
@print{}              1  2  3
@print{}  4  5  6  7  8  9 10
@print{} 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
@print{} 18 19 20 21 22 23 24
@print{} 25 26 27 28 29 30
@end cartouche
@end group
@end example
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

To obtain the @dfn{special calendar format}, start Gcal with the @option{-i}
respectively @w{@option{--type=special}} option:

@example
@group
@cartouche
$ gcal -i
@print{}
@print{} September 1994
@print{}
@print{} Sunday          4 11 18 25
@print{} Monday          5 12 19 26
@print{} Tuesday         6 13 20 27
@print{} Wednesday       7 14 21 28
@print{} Thursday     1  8 15 22 29
@print{} Friday       2  9 16 23 30
@print{} Saturday     3 10 17 24
@end cartouche
@end group
@end example

@need 1500
@item -O
@itemx --orthodox-calendar
@arindex -O
@arindex --orthodox-calendar
@cindex Calendar, leap year rule as used by Eastern churches
@cindex Use Eastern Orthodox churches' leap year rule
@cindex Eastern churches' leap year rule, use
@cindex Leap year rule as used by Eastern Orthodox churches
@anchor{x-orthodox-calendar}
Use the leap year rule as used by the Eastern Orthodox churches.

Without specifying the @option{--orthodox-calendar} option, Gcal is unable to
display Gregorian years later than 2799 in the correct way for the Eastern
churches, because they use a different scheme for calculating the leap years.
The method for computing leap years within the common Gregorian calendar,
which Gcal uses by default, is as follows:

@quotation
A leap year is any year which number can be divided by 4 without a remainder,
and years ending in hundreds are no leap years unless they are divisible by
400@.
@end quotation

But the Eastern Orthodox churches compute leap years within the Gregorian
calendar by using another rule:

@quotation
A leap year is any year which number can be divided by 4 without a remainder,
and years ending in hundreds are leap years, if a remainder of 2 or 6 occurs
when such a year is divided by 9@.
@end quotation

The first difference therefore occurs in the year 2800 which is a leap year
in the common Gregorian calendar, but an ordinary year only in the calendar
as used by the Eastern Orthodox churches.

@item -K
@itemx --with-week-number
@arindex -K
@arindex --with-week-number
@cindex Calendar sheet, provide with week numbers
@cindex Provide calendar sheet with week numbers
@cindex Week numbers in calendar sheet
Provide the calendar sheet with week numbers.
@xref{x-starting-day, , Calendar option @option{--starting-day=@var{argument}}},
@ref{x-iso-week-number, , Calendar option @option{--iso-week-number=yes@r{|}no}},
and
@ref{Internationalization, , Aspects in Internationalization},
for further details.

@need 500
@item --iso-week-number=yes@r{|}no
@arindex --iso-week-number=yes@r{|}no
@cindex Determine type of week number
@cindex Week number, determine type
@anchor{x-iso-week-number}
Determine the type of week numbers which are used in the calendar sheet, in
the fixed date list and by the @option{%@var{date}} actual date modifier.
@xref{x-starting-day, , Calendar option @option{--starting-day=@var{argument}}},
and
@ref{Internationalization, , Aspects in Internationalization},
for more details.

@need 2000
@table @option
@item --iso-week-number=yes
@arindex --iso-week-number=yes
@cindex @acronym{ISO}-8601:1988 week number
@cindex Week number, @acronym{ISO}-8601:1988
The methods of the @acronym{ISO}-8601:1988 are used for detecting week numbers;
this means a week starts on Mondays, and the first week of a year is the one
which includes the first Thursday; equivalently, the one which includes the
4th January.  This method is called @dfn{@acronym{ISO} week number} in the
further context.  If the starting day of the week is not set to Monday, the
week numbers are not represented correctly in most cases.  If you use this
option, you should take care of setting Monday as the starting day of the
week!

@item --iso-week-number=no
@arindex --iso-week-number=no
@cindex Standard week number
@cindex Week number, standard
Weeks start on the respective starting day of the week, and the days in a new
year that are preceding the first starting day of the week are in the last week
of the previous year, respectively in week zero of the new year.  This method
is called @dfn{standard week number} in the further context.
@end table

@item -u
@itemx --suppress-calendar
@arindex -u
@arindex --suppress-calendar
@cindex Calendar sheet, suppress
@cindex Suppress calendar sheet
Suppress output of calendar sheet explicitly.

@need 1000
@item -b @var{number}
@itemx --blocks=@var{number}
@arindex -b @var{number}
@arindex --blocks=@var{number}
@cindex Year calendar sheet blocks, number
@cindex Number of year calendar sheet blocks
@cindex Year calendar sheet, force output
@cindex Force year calendar sheet
@anchor{x-blocks}
Set @var{number} of calendar sheet blocks (valid arguments:
@w{@option{1@r{|}2@r{|}3@r{|}4@r{|}6@r{|}12})@.}  The default @var{number}
for the @emph{standard calendar format} is @option{-b4 } respectively
@w{@option{--blocks=4}}, and for the @emph{special calendar format}
@option{-b 3} respectively @w{@option{--blocks=3}}@.  If this option is
found, the program sees that a year calendar output is desired!

@table @option
@item -b 1
@itemx --blocks=1
@arindex -b 1
@arindex --blocks=1
Displays one block with twelve months at a time.

@item -b 2
@itemx --blocks=2
@arindex -b 2
@arindex --blocks=2
Displays two blocks with six months at a time.

@item -b 3
@itemx --blocks=3
@arindex -b 3
@arindex --blocks=3
Displays three blocks with four months at a time.

@item -b 4
@itemx --blocks=4
@arindex -b 4
@arindex --blocks=4
Displays four blocks with three months at a time.

@need 500
@item -b 6
@itemx --blocks=6
@arindex -b 6
@arindex --blocks=6
Displays six blocks with two months at a time.

@need 500
@item -b 12
@itemx --blocks=12
@arindex -b 12
@arindex --blocks=12
Displays twelve blocks with one month at a time.
@end table

@item -j@r{[}b@r{]}
@itemx --calendar-dates=special@r{|}both
@arindex -j@r{[}b@r{]}
@arindex --calendar-dates=special@r{|}both
@cindex Alternative date format in calendar sheet
@cindex Calendar sheet, alternative date format
Use alternative date format in calendar sheet instead of the default
standard format which displays the days of month in consecutive manner.

@table @option
@item -j
@itemx --calendar-dates=special
@arindex -j
@arindex --calendar-dates=special
@cindex Special date format in calendar sheet
@cindex Calendar sheet, special date format
Display the calendar sheet by using the special date format.  This means, the
days of year are displayed in consecutive manner instead of the days of month.

@item -jb
@itemx --calendar-dates=both
@arindex -jb
@arindex --calendar-dates=both
@cindex Standard and special date format in calendar sheet
@cindex Calendar sheet, standard and special date format
Display the calendar sheet by using both the standard date format
and special date format.
@end table

@item -jn@r{[}b@r{]}
@itemx --holiday-dates=special@r{|}both
@arindex -jn@r{[}b@r{]}
@arindex --holiday-dates=special@r{|}both
@cindex Alternative date format in eternal holiday list
@cindex Eternal holiday list, alternative date format
Use alternative date format in eternal holiday list instead of the default
standard format which displays the days of month in consecutive manner.
@xref{x-holiday-list, , Calendar option @option{--holiday-list@r{[}=long@r{|}short@r{]}}}.

@need 1000
@table @option
@item -jn
@itemx --holiday-dates=special
@arindex -jn
@arindex --holiday-dates=special
@cindex Special date format in eternal holiday list
@cindex Eternal holiday list, special date format
Display the eternal holiday list by using the special date format.  This
means, the days of year are displayed in consecutive manner instead of
the days of month.

@item -jnb
@itemx --holiday-dates=both
@arindex -jnb
@arindex --holiday-dates=both
@cindex Standard and special date format in eternal holiday list
@cindex Eternal holiday list, standard and special date format
Display the eternal holiday list by using both the standard date format
and special date format.
@end table

@item -jc@r{[}b@r{]}
@itemx --fixed-dates=special@r{|}both
@arindex -jc@r{[}b@r{]}
@arindex --fixed-dates=special@r{|}both
@cindex Alternative date format in fixed date list
@cindex Fixed date list, alternative date format
Use alternative date format in fixed date list instead of the default
standard format which displays the days of month in consecutive manner.
@xref{x-list-of-fixed-dates, , Fixed date option @option{--list-of-fixed-dates@r{[}=short@r{|}long@r{]}}}.

@table @option
@item -jc
@itemx --fixed-dates=special
@arindex -jc
@arindex --fixed-dates=special
@cindex Special date format in fixed date list
@cindex Fixed date list, special date format
Display the fixed date list by using the special date format.  This means,
the days of year are displayed in consecutive manner instead of the days
of month.

@item -jcb
@itemx --fixed-dates=both
@arindex -jcb
@arindex --fixed-dates=both
@cindex Standard and special date format in fixed date list
@cindex Fixed date list, standard and special date format
Display the fixed date list by using both the standard date format
and special date format.
@end table

@need 1000
@item -s @var{argument}
@itemx --starting-day=@var{argument}
@arindex -s @var{argument}
@arindex --starting-day=@var{argument}
@cindex Starting day of week, setting
@cindex Set starting day of week
@anchor{x-starting-day}
Set the starting day of the week (valid @var{argument}:
@w{@option{0@r{,} 1@r{@dots{}}7 @r{|} today @r{|} @var{weekday name}})@.}

For example:

@example
@group
--starting-day=Sunday @r{or}
--starting-day=7 @r{or}
-s SUNDAY @r{or}
-s sund @r{or}
-sSu @r{or}
-s 7
@end group
@end example

thus all specifies the Sunday
@w{(1@equiv{}Mon, 2@equiv{}Tue @dots{} 7@equiv{}Sun)}@.

If the @w{@option{-s today}} option (or @w{@option{--starting-day=today}})
or the @w{@option{-s 0}} option (or
@iftex
@*
@end iftex
@w{@option{--starting-day=0}}) is given, the starting day of the week
is set to the actual weekday as it is delivered by the system date.
@xref{Internationalization, , Aspects in Internationalization},
for more details.

@item --time-offset=@var{argument}
@arindex --time-offset=@var{argument}
@cindex Change base time of the astronomical functions
@cindex Base time of the astronomical functions, change
@cindex Universal time (UTC)
@cindex Greenwich Mean time (GMT)
@cindex Civil midnight time
@anchor{x-time-offset}
Change the base time of the astronomical functions (valid @var{argument}:
@w{@option{t@r{|}@@@r{|[}t@r{|}@@@r{][}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}@r{:[}@var{mm}@r{]}})@.}

If no @w{@option{--time-offset=@var{argument}}} option is given, the
astronomical data that is inserted into the eternal holiday list by
the @w{@option{--astronomical-holidays}} option
(@pxref{x-astronomical-holidays, , Calendar option @option{--astronomical-holidays}}),
and all Sun and Moon related special texts are always calculated for
0 @w{o'clock} Universal time @w{(UTC/GMT)}, thus @dfn{civil midnight time}@.

@xref{Sun data},
and
@ref{Moon data},
likewise
@ref{Moon phase},
for further information.

@cindex Relative time offset value
@cindex Time offset value, relative
The @var{argument} is either the @samp{t} or the @samp{@@} character
---where @samp{t} means a relation to the actual local time@footnote{The time
which is set as system time in the computer's clock.} and @samp{@@} denotes a
relation to the actual Universal time---, or one of these characters followed
by a displacement value, or only a displacement value which has to be
specified either by using the
@w{@code{@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}}} format or the
@w{@code{@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]}}} format.
@w{@code{@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}}} adds respectively subtracts
the specified amount of minutes @var{mmmm} from the base time value 0
@w{o'clock} Universal time (range @w{@code{0@r{@dots{}}9999}}), while
@w{@code{@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]}}} adds respectively
subtracts the given amount of hours @var{hh} (range @w{@code{0@r{@dots{}}99}})
and minutes @var{mm} (range @w{@code{0@r{@dots{}}59}}) from the base time value
0 @w{o'clock} Universal time.  The displacement value is always added to the
base time value 0 @w{o'clock} Universal time in case it is specified without
a @w{@code{+@r{|}-}} sign.

For example, the @w{@option{--time-offset=+1:}} option causes that while
displaying eternal holiday lists and fixed date lists, the time 0 @w{o'clock}
of the timezone @w{GMT-1} (@equiv{} CET) is used as the base time by the
astronomical functions instead of the base time 0 @w{o'clock} Universal time
(@equiv{} GMT)@.

@cindex Relative time offset value
@cindex Time offset value, relative
For example, the @w{@option{--time-offset=t-2:}} option causes that while
displaying eternal holiday lists and fixed date lists, the time that is
two hours earlier than the actual local time is used as the base time by the
astronomical functions instead of the base time 0 @w{o'clock} Universal time
(@equiv{} GMT)@.  For such a kind of relation, the term @dfn{relative time
offset value} will be used in the further context.

@item --transform-year=@var{argument}
@arindex --transform-year=@var{argument}
@cindex Change base year of calendar
@cindex Base year of calendar, change
Change the base year of calendar (valid @var{argument}:
@w{@option{-9999@r{@dots{}}@r{[}+@r{]}9999})@.}

For example, the @w{@option{--transform-year=-543}} option causes that while
displaying calendar sheets, eternal holiday lists and fixed date lists, the
year 543 @acronym{BC} is used as the base year of the calendar instead of
the year @acronym{AD} 1@.  This results in the case that ---for example---
for the year 1999 (Christian era), the year number 1999 is not used in the
above mentioned outputs, but the year number 2542 which is used in the
western oriented Thai calendar.

Nevertheless, Gcal does not respect the
@w{@option{--transform-year=@var{argument}}} option when using the
actual date modifier @option{%@var{date}}
(@pxref{Actual date modifier}),
the commands
(@pxref{Commands}),
and the fixed date entries in a resource file
(@pxref{Date part of a line})@.
There, all references made to a definite year are always treated in the way
that the year @acronym{AD} 1 is the base year of the calendar, so in fact it
is @strong{only} possible to use references based on the Christian era.

@item --gregorian-reform=1582@r{|}1700@r{|}1752@r{|}1753@r{|}@var{argument}
@arindex @w{--gregorian-reform=1582@r{|}1700@r{|}1752@r{|}1753@r{|}@var{argument}}
@cindex Period of Gregorian Reformation, set
@cindex Gregorian Reformation, set period
@cindex Hybrid calendar mode
@cindex Calendar mode, hybrid
Set the period which was skipped during the Gregorian Reformation.  By default,
Gcal runs in the @dfn{hybrid} calendar mode, i.e.@: Gcal automatically
changes from the Julian calendar system to the Gregorian calendar system if
output is related to dates after the Gregorian Reformation has happened.
@xref{Internationalization, , Aspects in Internationalization},
for more details.  Actually, four fixed default periods are supported,
and that of the year 1582, of the year 1700, of the year 1752 and of
the year 1753@.

If Gcal is called with the @w{@option{--gregorian-reform=1582}} option, it
assumes the Gregorian Reformation has occurred from 5th till 14th October
1582@.

If Gcal is called with the @w{@option{--gregorian-reform=1700}} option, it
assumes the Gregorian Reformation has occurred from 19th till 28th February
1700@.

If Gcal is called with the @w{@option{--gregorian-reform=1752}} option, it
assumes the Gregorian Reformation has occurred from 3rd till 13th September
1752@.

If Gcal is called with the @w{@option{--gregorian-reform=1753}} option, it
assumes the Gregorian Reformation has occurred from 18th till 28th February
1753@.

In case another period shall be respected, it can be arranged by the option
@var{argument} like @samp{@var{yyyyy},@var{mm},@var{first-day},@var{last-day}}@.
If the Gregorian Reformation has occurred for example on the 7th till the
17th April 1802, this can be arranged as follows:

@example
--gregorian-reform=1802,4,7,17
@end example

@cindex Proleptic calendar mode
@cindex Calendar mode, proleptic
Gcal is able to represent @w{so-called} @dfn{proleptic} calendars of a
definite calendar system.  This means, Gcal only uses a definite calendar
system during a definite period, although there was a change to another
calendar system in the historic reality during this definite period.
The following proleptic calendar systems are actually supported by Gcal:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@cindex Proleptic Gregorian calendar
Proleptic Gregorian calendars can be created from @acronym{AD} 302 until
@acronym{AD} 9999 if @w{@option{--gregorian-reform=301,12,31,31}} is used.
Unfortunately, Gcal actually cannot represent years before @acronym{AD} 302
in a @w{proleptic-Gregorian} manner.

@item
@cindex Proleptic Julian calendar
Proleptic Julian calendars can be created from @acronym{AD} 1 until
@acronym{AD} 9999 if @w{@option{--gregorian-reform=10002,12,31,31}} is used.
In this case, the actual system date that is normally based on the Gregorian
calendar and that is used by Gcal, is internally and automatically converted
into the according Julian date@footnote{The automatical conversion into the
according Julian date is always done if the actual system date, that is based
on the Gregorian calendar, is before the date of the Gregorian Reformation.}@.
The same happens if the actual system date is modified by using the actual
date modifier @option{%@var{date}}@.  In such a case, Gcal also assumes that
the given date is a Gregorian date, and converts it automatically into the
according Julian date internally.
@xref{Actual date modifier},
for further details.
@end itemize

Please note that it is possible to corrupt the calendars likewise the
fixed date feature logically (which works correctly now for the year
in which the Gregorian Reformation has occurred) if the argument of the
@w{@option{--gregorian-reform}} option is not used with care.

@item --date-format=de@r{|}us@r{|}gb@r{|}@var{text}
@arindex --date-format=de@r{|}us@r{|}gb@r{|}@var{text}
@anchor{x-date-format}
Set the date format which affects the ordering and representation of a
displayed date.
@xref{Internationalization, , Aspects in Internationalization},
for more details.  The date format text is respected by Gcal in the eternal
holiday list, in the fixed date list and the calendar sheets.  Moreover, Gcal
internally tries to obtain the best representation of a displayed date in case
the day-of-year numbers instead of the day-of-month numbers must be displayed,
or both types of numbers are used in a combined manner.

@cindex Date formats
@cindex Date formats, fixed default
@cindex Fixed default date formats
@cindex Date format texts, fixed default
@cindex Fixed default date format texts
Actually, three fixed default date formats are supported, and that
for German users, U.S.@: American users and for users in Great Britain.

@need 1000
If Gcal is called with the @w{@option{--date-format=de}} option,@*
the @w{@samp{%<2#K,  %1%>2*D%2 %<3#U %>04*Y}} date format text is used.
This result in that a date is displayed by using the
@w{@samp{@var{ww}, @ @var{dd} @var{mmm} @var{yyyy}}} ordering, for
example @w{@samp{Sa, @ 28 Aug 1999}}@.

If Gcal is called with the @w{@option{--date-format=us}} option,@*
the @w{@samp{%<3#K, %<3#U  %1%>2&*D%2 %>04*Y}} date format text is used.
This result in that a date is displayed by using the
@w{@samp{@var{www}, @var{mmm} @ @var{dd} @var{yyyy}}} ordering, for
example @w{@samp{Sat, Aug @ 28th 1999}}@.

If Gcal is called with the @w{@option{--date-format=gb}} option,@*
the @w{@samp{%<3#K,  %1%>2&*D%2 %<3#U %>04*Y}} date format text is used.
This result in that a date is displayed by using the
@w{@samp{@var{www}, @ @var{dd} @var{mmm} @var{yyyy}}} ordering, for
example @w{@samp{Sat, @ 28th Aug 1999}}@.

@vindex GCAL_DATE_FORMAT
@cindex Date formats, individual
@cindex Individual date formats
@cindex Date format texts, individual
@cindex Individual date format texts
In case another format text shall be respected, this format
text can either be set in the @w{@env{GCAL_DATE_FORMAT}} environment
variable@footnote{But @w{@env{GCAL_DATE_FORMAT}} is only used in case no
@w{@option{--date-format=de@r{|}us@r{|}gb@r{|}@var{text}}} option
is given.}, or it can be arranged by the option argument @var{text}@.  For
example, @w{@samp{--date-format='%Y %D %>02*M ; %1(%>5u#K)%2'}}
displays a date by using the
@w{@samp{@r{[[[}@var{y}@r{]}@var{y}@r{]}@var{y}@r{]}@var{y} @r{[}@var{d}@r{]}@var{d} @var{mm} ; (@var{wwwww})}}
ordering, thus for example @w{@samp{1999 28 08 ; (SATUR)}}@.
@xref{x-GCAL_DATE_FORMAT, , Environment Variable @env{GCAL_DATE_FORMAT}},
for further information.

@cindex Format instruction
@cindex Format elements
@cindex Date format elements
@cindex Character replacement instruction
The format text may contain on the one hand all characters which can be
managed by Gcal, and on the other hand character replacement instructions
and format elements which are transformed into their according values
at run-time.  Some format elements may have a format instruction which is
called @var{format} in the further context.
@xref{Format Instruction},
for the detailed description of the format instruction and its components.

@need 700
A minimum date format text must contain the following format elements minimum:

@quotation
The day number, one component of the month group, the year number
and both components of the highlighting group.
@end quotation

@tbindex Format elements and character replacement instructions in date format text
@tbindex Date format text, format elements and character replacement instructions
A weekday name format element may be included optionally into the date format
text.  The following format elements and character replacement instructions
are currently supported:

@table @code
@item %@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}D
Day number (must be defined)

@item %@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}Y
Year number (must be defined)

@item %@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}K
Weekday name (may be defined)
@end table

Month group (exactly one member must be defined):

@table @code
@item %@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}M
Month number

@item %@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}U
Month name
@end table

@need 1500
Highlighting group (all members must be defined and @code{%1}
must be specified before @code{%2}):

@table @code
@item %1
Start of highlighting sequence / marking character

@item %2
End of highlighting sequence / marking character
@end table

Character replacement instructions:

@table @code
@item _
Space/blank character @samp{ }

@item \_
Underscore character @samp{_}

@item \%
Percent character @samp{%}

@item \\
Backslash character @samp{\}
@end table

@xref{Table of Obsolete Date Formats},
and
@ref{Table of Obsolete Date Format Elements},
for further information.

@item --translate-string=@var{text}
@arindex --translate-string=@var{text}
@cindex Country specific special characters
@cindex Special characters, country specific
@anchor{x-translate-string}
Define the country specific special character pairs which are respected
or translated by a @var{style} format instruction component, respectively.
@xref{Format Instruction},
for the detailed description of the format instruction and its components.
The country specific special character pairs are arranged by the @var{text}
option argument as a sequence of single character pairs, and that in any
number and order.  The upper-case representation of the country specific
special character has to be specified at first, and after that its lower-case
representation.  Country specific special characters which do not have an
upper-case resp., lower-case representation in the character set used, like
e.g.@: the @samp{@ss{}}-character which is very usual in the German character
set, are also specified as a special character pair (here: @samp{@ss{}@ss{}}),
otherwise these special characters are not recognized and they are converted
incorrectly by the @var{style} format instruction component.  In case the
lower-case representation of the country specific special character is
specified at first, and after that its upper-case representation, this option
does not cause any further affects to the @var{style} format instruction
component; resulting, the country specific special characters specified
are not recognized as such and they remain untranslated therefore.

For example, a @w{@samp{@"A@"a@"O@"o@"U@"u@ss{}@ss{}}} option argument causes
the correct conversion of the preceding special characters in an individual
date format, which has a @var{style} format instruction component, and that,
how they are used by the character set used in Germany.
@end table

@node Fixed date options, , Calendar options, Options
@subsubsection Fixed date options
@cindex Fixed date options

@table @option
@item -v @var{argument}
@itemx --date-variable=@var{argument}
@arindex -v @var{argument}
@arindex --date-variable=@var{argument}
@cindex Date variables, global
@cindex Global date variables, definition
@cindex Definition of global date variables
@cindex Definition of date variables
@cindex Date variables, definition
@cindex Management of date variables
@cindex Date variables, management
@cindex Scope of date variables
@cindex Date variables, scope
@cindex Operations on date variables
@cindex Date variables, operations
@cindex Assignments to date variables
@cindex Date variables, assignments
@cindex Name space of date variables
@cindex Date variables, name space
@cindex @samp{:} separator character
@cindex Separator character, @samp{:}
@anchor{x-date-variable}
Define @dfn{global} date variable
which is visible in all referenced resource files
(@pxref{Date variables})@.
The option @var{argument} must either be a valid single date variable
definition or a (@samp{:}) colon-connected series of definitions.

A date variable name @var{dvar} consists of a single, case-insensitive
letter@footnote{Except the date variable @var{e} which is internally
reserved for the Easter Sunday's date, so it cannot be assigned or
operated therefore.  And except the date variable @var{t} which is
internally reserved for today's date, so it likewise cannot be assigned
or operated.}@.  In a definition, this name is trailed by the assignment
operator character @samp{=}, and the numerical values of month @var{mm}
(or a short, three characters month name, e.g.@: @samp{Jan}, @samp{Feb}@dots{})
and day @var{dd}, this variable has to store@footnote{Or another global date
variable name which is already defined, but @strong{no} date given in the
@samp{e@r{|}t@r{|}@var{dvar}@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}},
@samp{@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}}, or the
@samp{*d@r{|}w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}} format.}@.

For example:

@quotation
@option{--date-variable=a=1127:c=a} respectively@*
@option{-v a=1127:c=a}@*
stores the 27th November into the global date variable @var{a}
and into the global date variable @var{c}@.
@end quotation

@need 1000
@item --export-date-variables
@arindex --export-date-variables
@cindex Date variables, export of local
@cindex Export of local date variables
@cindex Visibility of local date variables
@cindex Date variables, visibility of local
Causes the export of local date variables from
one resource file to another resource file.
@xref{Date variables},
for more details.

@need 1000
@item -r @var{argument}
@itemx --text-variable=@var{argument}
@arindex -r @var{argument}
@arindex --text-variable=@var{argument}
@cindex Text variables, global
@cindex Global text variables, definition
@cindex Definition of global text variables
@cindex Definition of text variables
@cindex Text variables, definition
@cindex Management of text variables
@cindex Text variables, management
@cindex Scope of text variables
@cindex Text variables, scope
@cindex Assignments to text variables
@cindex Text variables, assignments
@cindex Name space of text variables
@cindex Text variables, name space
@cindex @samp{:} separator character
@cindex Separator character, @samp{:}
@anchor{x-text-variable}
Define @dfn{global} text variable
which is visible in all referenced resource files
(@pxref{Text variables})@.
The option @var{argument} must either be a valid single text variable
definition or a (@samp{:}) colon-connected series of definitions.

A text variable name @var{tvar} consists of the @samp{$} prefix and a
single, case-insensitive letter.

A text variable is defined as follows:

@itemize @bullet
@item
If the name of a text variable is trailed by the assignment operator
character @samp{=}, all the text which appears at the right side of
this assignment operator is assigned to this text variable.

@item
If the name of a text variable is trailed by the assignment operator
character @samp{?}, all the text which appears at the right side of this
assignment operator is assumed as an external command and executed by Gcal.
The output, which is created on the @emph{standard output channel} by the
command run, is assigned to this text variable; and that in an interpreted
manner.  This means, Gcal interprets all special texts and references
to other text variables which are contained in this output.
@xref{Text variables},
and
@ref{Special Texts processed},
for further information.

@item
If the name of a text variable is trailed by the assignment operator
character @samp{:}, all the text which appears at the right side of this
assignment operator is assumed as an external command and executed by Gcal.
The output, which is created on the @emph{standard output channel} by the
command run, is assigned to this text variable; and that in an uninterpreted
manner.  This means, Gcal does not interpret any special texts and
references to other text variables which are contained in this output.
See also
@ref{Text variables},
and
@ref{Special Texts processed},
for further details.
@end itemize

@cindex Execute command
@cindex Command execution
Indeed, Gcal executes external commands only if the @option{--execute-command}
option is given at program start-up.
@xref{x-execute-command, , Fixed date option @option{--execute-command}},
for more details.

The text which appears at the right side of one of the valid assignment
operator characters may reference names of already defined global text
variables.  These references are converted to the according textual values
just before the assignment is performed by Gcal.

A global text variable is defined with an @emph{empty contents} in case
no text appears at the right side of one of the valid assignment operator
characters.

For example:

@quotation
@option{--text-variable=$a=foo:$c=$a} respectively@*
@option{-r $a=foo:$c=$a}@*
stores the @samp{foo} text into the global text variable @var{$a}
and into the global text variable @var{$c}@.

@need 500
@option{--text-variable=$a\:foo:$c?bar} respectively@*
@option{-r $a\:foo:$c?bar}@*
stores the uninterpreted output of the @command{foo} command into
the global text variable @var{$a}, and the interpreted output of
the @command{bar} command into the global text variable @var{$c}@.
@end quotation

@cindex Depreciation of special characters
@cindex Special characters, depreciation
@cindex Depreciation character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} depreciation character
@cindex Protection of special characters
@cindex Special characters, protection
@cindex Protection character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} protection character
You may depreciate the special meaning of the @samp{:} separator character
---in case this character itself is needed--- by placing a @samp{\} (backslash)
character before it, e.g.@: @samp{\:}@.  If you need the @samp{\:} characters
themselves, you have to protect the @samp{\} (backslash) character by another
@samp{\} (backslash) character, e.g.@: @samp{\\:}@.

@cindex Depreciation of special characters
@cindex Special characters, depreciation
@cindex Depreciation character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} depreciation character
@cindex Protection of special characters
@cindex Special characters, protection
@cindex Protection character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} protection character
You may depreciate the special meaning of the @samp{$} prefix character
---in case this character itself is needed in the text--- by placing a
@samp{\} (backslash) character before it, e.g.@: @samp{\$}@.  If you need
the @samp{\$} characters themselves in the text, you have to protect the
@samp{\} (backslash) character by another @samp{\} (backslash) character,
e.g.@: @samp{\\$}@.

@cindex Pseudo space character, @samp{_}
@cindex @samp{_} pseudo space character
Each time a @samp{_} (underscore) character is found in @var{argument}, this
character is replaced by a real @samp{ } (space) character.

@cindex Depreciation of special characters
@cindex Special characters, depreciation
@cindex Depreciation character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} depreciation character
@cindex Protection of special characters
@cindex Special characters, protection
@cindex Protection character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} protection character
You may depreciate the special meaning of the @samp{_} (underscore) character
---in case this character itself is needed--- by placing a @samp{\}
(backslash) character before it, e.g.@: @samp{\_}@.  If you need the @samp{\_}
themselves, you have to protect the @samp{\} (backslash) character by another
@samp{\} (backslash) character, e.g.@: @samp{\\_}@.

@need 1000
@item --export-text-variables
@arindex --export-text-variables
@cindex Text variables, export of local
@cindex Export of local text variables
@cindex Visibility of local text variables
@cindex Text variables, visibility of local
Causes the export of local text variables from
one resource file to another resource file.
@xref{Text variables},
for more details.

@item --adjust-value=@var{argument}
@arindex --adjust-value=@var{argument}
@cindex Reference altitude used for sunrise and sunset, set
@cindex Sunrise and sunset, set reference altitude
@cindex Reference altitude used for moonrise and moonset, set
@cindex Moonrise and moonset, set reference altitude
@anchor{x-adjust-value}
Causes on the one hand, that the number given as @var{argument} to the
@w{@option{--adjust-value}} option is used as reference altitude to
calculate the rise and set times by the Sun and Moon oriented special texts.
The option argument must be a rational number in range @w{-90.0@dots{}+90.0},
which declares the angle distance in decimal degrees from the center
of astronomical object to the horizon.  For example, you can detect the
time when the center of the Sun or the Moon is @w{20.5} decimal degrees
below the horizon if you use @w{@option{--adjust-value=-20.5}}@.

@cindex Set shadow length factor
@cindex Shadow length factor, set
And causes on the other hand, that the number that is given as @var{argument}
is used as factor for computing the shadow length of a vertical pole by the Sun
oriented special texts.  The option argument must be a rational number in range
@w{0.0@dots{}+90.0}, which declares the shadow length.  For example, you can
detect the time when the shadow length of vertical pole is three and a half
times longer than the shadow length that appears at astronomical noon if
you use @w{@option{--adjust-value=3.5}}@.

@xref{Sun data},
and
@ref{Moon data},
for further information.

@need 1000
@item --atmosphere=@var{air-pressure}@r{[,}@var{temperature}@r{]}
@arindex --atmosphere=@var{air-pressure}@r{[,}@var{temperature}@r{]}
@cindex Base data of Earth's atmosphere to calculate refraction, set
@cindex Earth's atmosphere, set base data to calculate refraction
@cindex Temperature of Earth's atmosphere, set
@cindex Earth's atmosphere, set temperature
@cindex Air pressure of Earth's atmosphere, set
@cindex Earth's atmosphere, set air pressure
@cindex Refraction, atmospheric
@cindex Atmospheric refraction
@anchor{x-atmosphere}
Set the base data of the Earth's atmosphere that is necessary to calculate the
amount of @dfn{refraction}@footnote{Refraction is an optical phenomenon caused
by the Earth's atmosphere, which leads to an apparent raising of the location
of a celestial body.  The amount of refraction increases with growing air
pressure and sinking temperature and @w{vice-versa}@.}, that is used by the
Sun and Moon oriented special texts.
The option argument consists of one or two rational numbers, which are separated
by a @samp{,} character.  The first number denotes the air pressure in
millibar, and the second number specifies the air temperature in degree
Celsius.  The default value for the air pressure is @w{1013.25} millibar,
and the default value for the temperature is @w{15.0} degree Celsius.  For
example, if you use @w{@option{--atmosphere=1010,10}}, you define atmospheric
conditions as they are existing for an air pressure of 1010 millibar and a
temperature of 10 degree Celsius.  If you set an air pressure value less or
equal zero, no atmospheric refraction will be respected by the Sun and Moon
oriented special texts, as for example done by @w{@option{--atmosphere=0}}@.

@xref{Sun data},
and
@ref{Moon data},
for further information.

@item --limit
@arindex --limit
@cindex Limit sunrise and sunset to actual day
@cindex Sunrise and sunset, limit to actual day
@anchor{x-limit}
Causes when calculating the rise and set times by the Sun oriented special
texts for high latitudes, that a rise or set event which possibly occurs
on a previous or next day, is not displayed as occurring on the actual day
as it is done by default.  At high latitudes, i.e.@: above the solar Arctic
Circle, it is fact that no, or more than one sunrise or sunset happens during
a day at definite dates of the year.  As a special text basically leads in a
single, atomical output, even it should result in several output in reality,
Gcal puts such an event on a previous or next day.  Then, data represented
in this manner could be misinterpreted very easily.

The following example is used to explain this.  It calculates the time the
astronomical twilight ends for the location M@"unster, Germany, during some
days in May 2000, and that with and without the @option{--limit} option in
each case:

@include examples/limit.texi

As one can see well in the above example, the output for the days since
9th May differs in that the times shown without the @option{--limit} option
obviously exceeded the civil midnight time and actually cannot happen during
these days, whereas no times are shown for the days since 9th May if the
@option{--limit} option is used because the time circle is exceeded.
Astronomically seen, it is the case that the end of the astronomical twilight
is at @w{23:57} @w{o'clock} local time on 8th May, no end of astronomical
twilight happens on 9th May because the center of the Sun's disk is always
above 18 degrees (the reference altitude of the astronomical twilight) below
a geometric horizon, but on 10th May at @w{00:01} @w{o'clock} local time, this
reference altitude is passed again.  Thus, the time that is detected for the
9th May has properly to be moved to the 10th May, et cetera, as it is expressed
by the output that is created by using the @option{--limit} option.

@xref{Sun data},
for further information.

@item --cycle-end=@var{argument}
@arindex --cycle-end=@var{argument}
@cindex Cycle ending time value for Sun and Moon data and times, set
@cindex Set cycle ending time value for Sun and Moon data and times
@cindex Sun and Moon data and times, set cycle ending time value
@cindex Cycle mode
@anchor{x-cycle-end}
Calculates the Sun and Moon oriented special texts that are dynamical,
i.e.@: depending on the respective clocktime, for a series of clocktimes for
the current day, i.e.@: determination is done for any time interval that can
be individually defined by the user.  Gcal is always put into such a
@dfn{cycle mode} if the @w{@option{--cycle-end}} option is given at
program @w{start-up}@.  The @var{argument} of the @w{@option{--cycle-end}}
option is syntactically according to the argument which may be given to
the @w{@option{--time-offset}} option, thus
@w{@option{t@r{|}@@@r{|[}t@r{|}@@@r{][}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}@r{:[}@var{mm}@r{]}}@.}
@xref{x-time-offset, , Calendar option @option{--time-offset=@var{argument}}},
for the detailed explanation of the preceding option argument.
Thus, the @w{@option{--cycle-end}} option is used to fix the ending time
of the time interval, whereas the @w{@option{--time-offset}} option is
@strong{implicitly} used to fix the starting time of the time interval,
that is 0 @w{o'clock} by default@footnote{Correct, the
@w{@option{--time-offset}} option has multiple modes of
operation that are depending on the context of its use!}@.

If values for the time interval are given to both above mentioned options
that fall short of 0 @w{o'clock}, these values are automatically set to 0
@w{o'clock}.  If values for the time interval are given that exceed @w{23:39}
@w{o'clock}, these values are automatically set to @w{23:59} @w{o'clock}.

The timestep value between the starting and the ending time of the time
interval that is respected by Gcal is one minute by default.  This value
can at pleasure be changed by using the @w{@option{--cycle-step}} option.
@xref{x-cycle-step, , Fixed date option @option{--cycle-step=@var{argument}}},
for more details.

You should always keep in mind that the use of the cycle mode is efficient
only if the current time of the time interval is also part of that resource
file line that has to be evaluated in this manner.  Otherwise, it is difficult
to find out unobjectionably lateron when displaying the data and times, which
Sun or Moon oriented value resulted in what time.

The following example shows how the topocentric elevation angle of the Sun
for the location M@"unster, Germany, is calculated during two days in April
2000, and that for the time interval @w{12:00} @w{o'clock} until @w{12:05}
@w{o'clock} local time in each case:

@include examples/cycle-1.texi

@xref{Sun data},
and
@ref{Moon data},
for further information.

@item --cycle-step=@var{argument}
@arindex --cycle-step=@var{argument}
@cindex Cycle displacement value for Sun and Moon data and times, set
@cindex Set cycle displacement value for Sun and Moon data and times
@cindex Sun and Moon data and times, set cycle displacement value
@cindex Cycle timestep value for Sun and Moon data and times, set
@cindex Set cycle timestep value for Sun and Moon data and times
@cindex Sun and Moon data and times, set cycle timestep value
@anchor{x-cycle-step}
Changes the timestep value that is used between the starting and ending
clocktime of the time interval, in which the Sun and Moon oriented special
texts are calculated, that are dynamical, i.e.@: depending on the respective
clocktime.
@xref{x-cycle-end, , Fixed date option @option{--cycle-end=@var{argument}}},
how to define such a time interval.  Without the @w{@option{--cycle-end}}
option, a @w{@option{--cycle-step}} option is completely ignored.
It also does not enable Gcal's cycle mode.  The @var{argument} of the
@w{@option{--cycle-step}} option is by change syntactically according to the
argument which may be given to the @w{@option{--time-offset}} option, and
that relative time offset value references based on the actual local time
and Universal time cannot be made, respectively.  Gcal always uses the amount
of the given timestep value.  Thus, the template for the argument that
may be given to the @w{@option{--cycle-step}} option is
@w{@option{@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}@r{:[}@var{mm}@r{]}}@.}
@xref{x-time-offset, , Calendar option @option{--time-offset=@var{argument}}},
for the detailed explanation of the preceding option argument.

The timestep value between the starting and the ending time of the time
interval that is respected by Gcal is one minute by default.

The following example shows how the topocentric elevation angle of the Sun
for the location M@"unster, Germany, is calculated during two days in April
2000, and that for the time interval @w{10:00} @w{o'clock} until @w{17:00}
@w{o'clock} local time with a timestep value of one hour and 15 minutes
in each case:

@include examples/cycle-2.texi

@xref{Sun data},
and
@ref{Moon data},
for further information.

@item --precise
@arindex --precise
@cindex More precise representation of astronomical data and times
@cindex Astronomical data and times, more precise representation
@cindex More precise representation of geographical data
@cindex Geographical data, more precise representation
@anchor{x-precise}
The astronomical data and times that are created by the Sun and Moon oriented
special texts, and the geographical data that is created by the distance and
course angle oriented special text, respectively, are displayed by using a
higher precision, i.e.@: according to the mode or style of representation
and the type of special text, decimal values are displayed with more decimal
places, or output of the time seconds part or the arcseconds part.

@xref{Sun data},
and
@ref{Moon data},
likewise
@ref{Geographical distance and course angle},
for further information.

@need 500
@item --execute-command
@arindex --execute-command
@cindex Shell
@cindex Command line interpreter
@cindex Execute command
@cindex Command execution
@anchor{x-execute-command}
Causes on the one hand, that shell command @code{%!@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}}
special texts are executed, and not displayed textually only.
@xref{Shell Command, , Shell command @code{%!@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text},
for more details.  And causes on the other hand, that
@w{@samp{@var{tvar}?@r{[}@var{command}@r{]}}} and
@w{@samp{@var{tvar}:@r{[}@var{command}@r{]}}} text variable definitions
is assigned the output of an external command, and not the text which
contains the call of the external command.
@xref{Text variables},
for further information.

@item -D @var{argument}
@itemx --filter-day=@var{argument}
@arindex -D @var{argument}
@arindex --filter-day=@var{argument}
@cindex Filtration, days of fixed dates
@cindex Fixed dates, filtration of days
Displays only those fixed dates, whose date is not excluded
by the given @var{argument}@.
@xref{Date part of a line},
and likewise
@ref{Exclusions without any argument, , Exclusions without any argument @code{%@var{?}} special texts}@.
The @var{argument} consists of one or more characters as used in the exclusion
without any argument @code{%@var{?}} special text; but without the leading
@samp{%} character in each case.

For example, it is possible to induce Gcal to display only those fixed dates
from the resource file @file{demo.rc} for the whole year which are legals
holidays, and moreover, Saturdays or Sundays:

@example
gcal -f demo.rc --year --filter-day=Rv
@end example

@item -P @var{argument}
@itemx --filter-period=@var{argument}
@arindex -P @var{argument}
@arindex --filter-period=@var{argument}
@cindex Filtration, periods of fixed dates
@cindex Fixed dates, filtration of periods
Displays only those fixed dates, whose date is not excluded
by the given @var{argument}@.
@xref{Date part of a line},
and likewise
@ref{Exclusions with date argument, , Exclusions with date argument @code{%@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special texts}@.
The @var{argument} consists of one or more expressions as used in the
exclusion with date argument @code{%@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special
text; but without the leading @samp{%} character in each case.  You can
use more than one of these @code{%@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} expressions
by connecting them with a @samp{,} character.

For example, it is possible to induce Gcal to display only those fixed dates
from the resource file @file{demo.rc} for the whole year which appear within
the period of the 17th and the 20th of any month, and which appear on the 31st
of any month.

@example
gcal -f demo.rc -y -P i00000017#00000020,i00000031#00000031
@end example

@item -I @var{pattern}
@itemx --filter-text=@var{pattern}
@arindex -I @var{pattern}
@arindex --filter-text=@var{pattern}
@cindex Filtration, fixed date texts
@cindex Fixed date texts, filtration
@cindex Regular expression
@cindex Pattern
@cindex Line break-up character, @samp{~}
@cindex @samp{~} line break-up character
@cindex Line break-up character, @samp{^}
@cindex @samp{^} line break-up character
@anchor{x-filter-text}
Displays only those fixed dates, whose completely expanded
text@footnote{Except Gcal's line break-up characters @samp{~}
and @samp{^}, so you have to use @samp{\~} and @samp{\\^} in
the @var{pattern} argument if you want to search texts which
contain these characters.} is matched by the given @var{pattern}@.
@xref{Text part of a line},
and
@ref{Replacements, , @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} special texts for text replacement}@.
The @var{pattern} is a @emph{regular expression},
as recognized by the Unix @code{ed} line-editor.
@xref{Regular Expressions},
for further information.

For example, it is possible to induce Gcal to display all fixed dates from
the resource file @file{doctor.rc} for the current month, which are defined
for dentists or oculists:

@example
gcal -f doctor.rc --month -I "[dD]entist|[oO]culist"
@end example

@cindex Pseudo space character, @samp{_}
@cindex @samp{_} pseudo space character
Each time a @samp{_} (underscore) character is found in the @var{pattern}
argument, this character is replaced by a real @samp{ } (space) character.

@cindex Depreciation of special characters
@cindex Special characters, depreciation
@cindex Depreciation character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} depreciation character
@cindex Protection of special characters
@cindex Special characters, protection
@cindex Protection character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} protection character
You may depreciate the special meaning of the @samp{_} (underscore) character
---in case this character itself is needed--- by placing a @samp{\}
(backslash) character before it, e.g.@: @samp{\_}@.  If you need the @samp{\_}
characters themselves, you have to protect the @samp{\} (backslash) character
by another @samp{\} (backslash) character, e.g.@: @samp{\\_}@.

@item --ignore-case
@arindex --ignore-case
@cindex Filtration, fixed date texts
@cindex Fixed date texts, filtration
@cindex Ignoring case distinctions in regular expression
@cindex Ignoring case, regexp
@cindex Regular expression, ignoring case distinctions
@cindex Regexp, ignoring case
@anchor{x-ignore-case}
Ignores all case distinctions in both the completely expanded text and
the @var{pattern} of the @w{@option{--filter-text=@var{pattern}}} option.
@xref{x-filter-text, , Fixed date option @option{--filter-text=@var{pattern}}}.

@item --revert-match
@arindex --revert-match
@cindex Filtration, fixed date texts
@cindex Fixed date texts, filtration
@cindex Reverted regular expression
@cindex Regular expression, reverted
@cindex Negated regular expression
@cindex Regular expression, negated
@cindex Complemented regular expression
@cindex Regular expression, complemented
Displays all those fixed dates, whose completely expanded text does not
match the @var{pattern} of the @w{@option{--filter-text=@var{pattern}}} option.
@xref{x-filter-text, , Fixed date option @option{--filter-text=@var{pattern}}}.

@item -c@r{|}C@r{[}-@r{]}
@itemx --today
@itemx --list-of-fixed-dates@r{[}=short@r{|}long@r{]}
@itemx --descending-fixed-dates@r{[}=short@r{|}long@r{]}
@arindex -c@r{|}C@r{[}-@r{]}
@arindex --today
@arindex --list-of-fixed-dates@r{[}=short@r{|}long@r{]}
@arindex --descending-fixed-dates@r{[}=short@r{|}long@r{]}
@cindex Fixed date, option
@cindex Fixed dates
@cindex Fixed date period long-style option, @option{--today}
@cindex Today's fixed dates
@cindex Fixed dates for @emph{today}
@cindex Activate fixed date function
@cindex Fixed date function, activate
@anchor{x-list-of-fixed-dates}
Activate the fixed date function and display fixed date messages, if any.

@table @option
@item -c
@itemx --today
@itemx --list-of-fixed-dates=short
@arindex -c
@arindex --today
@arindex --list-of-fixed-dates=short
@cindex Error code 1
@cindex Exit code 1
Activate fixed date function (use standard resource file implicitly) and
list all dates related to the actual system date (@equiv{}today), sorted in
ascending order.  If no fixed dates related to the current day are found, no
fixed date messages are displayed and the program is terminated with an error
code.
@xref{x-1-Error-code, , Error Code 1}.

@need 1000
@item -c-
@itemx --descending-fixed-dates=short
@arindex -c-
@arindex --descending-fixed-dates=short
@cindex Error code 1
@cindex Exit code 1
Activate fixed date function (use standard resource file implicitly) and
list all dates related to the actual system date (@equiv{}today), sorted in
descending order.  If no fixed dates related to the current day are found, no
fixed date messages are displayed and the program is terminated with an error
code.
@xref{x-1-Error-code, , Error Code 1}.

@need 1000
@item -C
@itemx --list-of-fixed-dates=long
@arindex -C
@arindex --list-of-fixed-dates=long
Activate fixed date function (use standard resource file implicitly) and
list all dates related to the actual system date (@equiv{}today), sorted in
ascending order.  If no fixed dates related to the current day are found, an
``empty'' fixed date message is displayed which is only consisting of the date.

@need 1000
@item -C-
@itemx --descending-fixed-dates=long
@arindex -C-
@arindex --descending-fixed-dates=long
Activate fixed date function (use standard resource file implicitly) and
list all dates related to the actual system date (@equiv{}today), sorted in
descending order.  If no fixed dates related to the current day are found, an
``empty'' fixed date message is displayed which is only consisting of the date.
@end table

@need 1500
@item -f@r{|}F @var{name}@r{[}+@r{@dots{}]}
@itemx --resource-file=@var{name}@r{[}+@r{@dots{}]}
@arindex -f@r{|}F @var{name}@r{[}+@r{@dots{}]}
@arindex --resource-file=@var{name}@r{[}+@r{@dots{}]}
@cindex Resource file, additional
@cindex Additional resource file
@cindex Resource file, other
@cindex Other resource file
@cindex Activate fixed date function
@cindex Fixed date function, activate
@cindex Error code 1
@cindex Exit code 1
@anchor{x-resource-file}
Activate fixed date function and use file @var{name} instead of the standard
resource file.  Then list all dates, sorted in ascending order which occur in
the fixed date period.  If no other fixed date period is specified, the actual
system date (@equiv{}today) is used for the fixed date period.  If the option
letter @option{f} of the short-style option is used and no dates related to the
fixed date period are found in @var{name}, no fixed date messages are displayed
and the program is terminated with an error code.
@xref{x-1-Error-code, , Error Code 1}.
If the option letter @option{F} of the short-style option is used and no dates
related to the fixed date period are found in @var{name}, an ``empty'' fixed
date message is displayed which is only consisting of the date.

@need 1000
@cindex Separator character, @samp{+}
@cindex @samp{+} separator character
@vindex HOME
You can use more than one resource file @var{name} by connecting
them with a @samp{+} character, e.g.@::

@quotation
@option{--resource-file=./foo+xyz+/data/bar+$HOME/.gcalrc} resp.,@*
@option{-f ./foo+xyz+/data/bar+$HOME/.gcalrc}
@end quotation

respects all files given in the preceding argument
by using a special file search mechanism.
@xref{x-File-searching-mechanism, , File searching mechanism},
for more details.  Use @file{/dev/null} to avoid the use of the standard
resource file, useful for creating @emph{empty fixed date lists}@.
If a single @samp{-} character is given as file @var{name}, like
@w{@option{--resource-file=./foo+-+xyz}} or @option{-F-}, but not
@w{@option{-F -}}, Gcal reads and processes all input received
from the @emph{standard input channel}@.

@cindex Depreciation of special characters
@cindex Special characters, depreciation
@cindex Depreciation character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} depreciation character
@cindex Protection of special characters
@cindex Special characters, protection
@cindex Protection character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} protection character
You may depreciate the special meaning of the @samp{+} separator character
---in case this character itself is needed--- by placing a @samp{\}
(backslash) character before it, e.g.@: @samp{\+}@.  If you need the @samp{\+}
characters themselves, you have to protect the @samp{\} (backslash) character
by another @samp{\} (backslash) character, e.g.@: @samp{\\+}@.

@cindex Pseudo space character, @samp{_}
@cindex @samp{_} pseudo space character
Each time a @samp{_} (underscore) character is found in @var{name}, this
character is replaced by a real @samp{ } (space) character.

@cindex Depreciation of special characters
@cindex Special characters, depreciation
@cindex Depreciation character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} depreciation character
@cindex Protection of special characters
@cindex Special characters, protection
@cindex Protection character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} protection character
You may depreciate the special meaning of the @samp{_} (underscore) character
---in case this character itself is needed--- by placing a @samp{\}
(backslash) character before it, e.g.@: @samp{\_}@.  If you need the @samp{\_}
characters themselves, you have to protect the @samp{\} (backslash) character
by another @samp{\} (backslash) character, e.g.@: @samp{\\_}@.

@item -# @var{line}
@itemx --here=@var{line}
@arindex -# @var{line}
@arindex --here=@var{line}
@cindex Resource file line, additional
@cindex Additional resource file line
@cindex Resource file line, further
@cindex Further resource file line
@cindex Activate fixed date function
@cindex Fixed date function, activate
@cindex Error code 1
@cindex Exit code 1
Activate fixed date function and use the @var{line} argument together with the
standard resource file respectively additional resource files.  The @var{line}
argument has to be a valid line as it may occur in a Gcal resource file
(@pxref{Structure of resource file}),
and is always evaluated last @strong{after} the processing of all resource
files, so dealing with references to exported local date or text variables is
enabled.  This option may be given multiple and it will be processed exactly
in the given order.  All dates are listed, sorted in ascending order which
occur in the fixed date period.  If no other fixed date period is specified,
the actual system date (@equiv{}today) is used for the fixed date period.
If no dates related to the fixed date period are found in the @var{line}, no
fixed date messages are displayed and the program is terminated with an error
code.
@xref{x-1-Error-code, , Error Code 1}.

For example, the call:

@example
gcal -# "0*d1su#99su.7 ^%Z" --here="#include <foo>" -y
@end example

causes the implicit processing of the standard resource file just before
the further resource file line @samp{0*d1su#99su.7 ^%Z} and following
@samp{#include <foo>} are processed, and that as if these lines were
a physical part of the standard resource file.

@need 2000
@cindex Pseudo space character, @samp{_}
@cindex @samp{_} pseudo space character
Each time a @samp{_} (underscore) character is found in @var{line}, this
character is replaced by a real @samp{ } (space) character.

@cindex Depreciation of special characters
@cindex Special characters, depreciation
@cindex Depreciation character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} depreciation character
@cindex Protection of special characters
@cindex Special characters, protection
@cindex Protection character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} protection character
You may depreciate the special meaning of the @samp{_} (underscore) character
---in case this character itself is needed--- by placing a @samp{\}
(backslash) character before it, e.g.@: @samp{\_}@.  If you need the @samp{\_}
characters themselves, you have to protect the @samp{\} (backslash) character
by another @samp{\} (backslash) character, e.g.@: @samp{\\_}@.
@end table

@noindent
@strong{Please note:}@*
If the short-style option @option{-c} and/or its modifiers
@w{@option{t@r{|[}w@r{|}m@r{|}y@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}}}, or the short-style option
@option{-f} is/are given in @strong{upper-case}, e.g.@::

@example
@group
-C
-F foo.bar
-CeT
-c-aW+
-CeaxY-
-c-M
@end group
@end example

@noindent
Gcal displays fixed date messages for @strong{every} day of the requested
period.

@need 2000
The modifiers of a combined/complex/packed short-style fixed date option must
be constructed according to following steps, because Gcal treats them as
positional parameters:

@quotation
@table @asis
@item First step: @emph{Representation-of-text-modifier}
@cindex Representation-of-text-modifier
@option{a},
@option{A},
@option{e@r{|}E},
@option{J},
@option{k},
@option{o},
@option{Q},
@option{U},
@option{x},
@option{z},
@option{Z}

@item Second step: @emph{Period-of-fixed-dates-modifier}
@cindex Period-of-fixed-dates-modifier
@w{@option{d},}
@w{@option{l},}
@w{@option{t@r{|}T},}
@w{@option{w@r{|}W@r{|}m@r{|}M@r{|}y@r{|}Y@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@option{@var{n}+@r{|}-},}
@w{@option{@var{n}d},}
@w{@option{@var{n}w},}
@w{@option{*d@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}},}
@w{@option{*w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}},}
@w{@option{@@e@r{|}t@r{|}@var{dvar}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{]}},}
@w{@option{@@e@r{|}t@r{|}@var{dvar}@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}},}
@w{@option{@var{mm}@var{dd}},}
@w{@option{@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}}}
@end table
@end quotation

@need 3000
If you want to operate with the preceding modifiers, an @strong{explicit}
@w{@option{-c@r{|}C@r{[}-@r{]}}} short-style option must be leading on the
one hand, e.g.@::

@example
@group
-c-t
-cw-
-CZdekloQUzJaxA12+
@end group
@end example

@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{d}
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{l}
@cindex Fixed date period option, @option{--leap-day=february@r{|}march}
@noindent
and only @strong{one} period defining fixed date period modifier
may be given@footnote{This means, exclusive the @option{--include-today}
option respectively @option{d} modifier, the @option{--list-mode}
option or the @option{l} modifier, and the
@option{--leap-day=february@r{|}march} option.}@.

@cindex Single character options
@cindex Options, single character
@cindex Single command line word
@cindex Command line word, single
@noindent
Or on the other hand, the modifiers must be given as single character options
or composed into a single command line word, and additionally either the
short-style option @w{@option{-c@r{|}C@r{[}-@r{]}}},
@w{@option{-f@r{|}F @var{name}@r{[}+@r{@dots{}]}}} or
@w{@option{-# @var{line}}}@footnote{Respectively their according long-style
options.} must be given like:

@example
@group
-c -t
-w- -c
-a -Ad -e -kloQUxz -C12+
-F foo.bar -dJZA -l*d10
--here="; Comment" -dZAa
@end group
@end example

@need 1500
@cindex Single character options
@cindex Options, single character
@cindex Single command line word
@cindex Command line word, single
@cindex Fixed date, option
@cindex Fixed dates
@cindex Activate fixed date function
@cindex Fixed date function, activate
@noindent
If the modifiers are given as single character options or composed into a
single command line word, and one of the
@w{@option{t@r{|}T@r{|[}w@r{|}W@r{|}m@r{|}M@r{|}y@r{|}Y@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]]}}}
modifiers is used@footnote{Or their according alias names, like
@option{--today}, @option{--tomorrow}@enddots{}}, it is unnecessary
to give a @w{@option{-c@r{|}C@r{[}-@r{]}}} respectively
@w{@option{-f@r{|}F @var{name}@r{[}+@r{@dots{}]}}} short-style
option@footnote{Or their according long-style options.} to activate
the fixed date function of Gcal, because it is triggered implicitly
by means of these modifiers / alias names.

@xref{Coding Scheme},
whose tables explain the relations between the @emph{date part}
@w{(@var{yyyy}@dots{})} of a resource file line and the modifiers,
the short-style option @w{@option{-c@r{|}C@r{[]}}} ---which is used
for enabling the fixed date feature--- respectively the long-style
option @w{@option{--period-of-fixed-dates=@var{argument}}} may have,
i.e.@: they point out all possible correspondences.  This is necessary
because Gcal does not respect all entries found in a resource file if
a @emph{fixed date} argument is given, it respects only those entries
which have a definite relation to the @emph{fixed date} argument to
avoid the output of redundant information!

@page
@cindex Fixed date text modifiers
@cindex Modifiers, fixed date text
@cindex Options, fixed date text
@noindent
@strong{Fixed date text modifiers and options:}

@table @option
@item --biorhythm-axis=@var{number}
@arindex --biorhythm-axis=@var{number}
@cindex Fixed date text option, @option{--biorhythm-axis=@var{number}}
@anchor{x-biorhythm-axis}
The width of the biorhythm text graphics ---which can be created by means of
the biorhythm text graphics @code{%;@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text--- is
changed to @var{number} characters for each axis of the bar.  The @var{number}
argument must be an integer value between @w{1@dots{}100}, the default number
of characters is 20@.  If the @var{number} divides 100 with a remainder, it is
internally reduced to the nearest number that divides 100 without any
remainder.  This means, only the numbers 1, 2, 4, 5, 10, 20, 25, 50 and
100 are factually respected, so a @var{number} argument of 19 is internally
reduced to 10@.

For example:

@include examples/bio.texi

@xref{Biorhythm, , Biorhythm @code{%@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special texts},
for more details.

@item --moonimage-lines=@var{number}
@arindex --moonimage-lines=@var{number}
@cindex Fixed date text option, @option{--moonimage-lines=@var{number}}
@anchor{x-moonimage-lines}
The height of the Moon phase text graphics ---which can be created by means of
the Moon phase text graphics @code{%Z@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text--- is
changed to @var{number} lines.  The @var{number} argument must be an integer
value between @w{6@dots{}30}, the default number of lines is 12@.

@page
For example:

@include examples/moon.texi

@xref{Moon phase, , Moon phase @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special texts},
for more details.

@item a
@itemx --include-resource-file-name
@arindex -a
@arindex -ca
@arindex --include-resource-file-name
@cindex Fixed date text modifier, @option{a}
Extend fixed date text by the name of the resource file and the line
number which the fixed date text comes from, e.g.@::

@example
@group
Mon, Jan   1st 1995: (`Eternal holiday list'#00003) New Year's day
Mon, Jan   1st 1995: (.gcalrc#00987) No fixed dates
@dots{}
@end group
@end example

@item A
@itemx --alternative-format
@arindex -A
@arindex -cA
@arindex --alternative-format
@cindex Fixed date text modifier, @option{A}
@cindex Fixed date text modifier, alternative list format
Instead of using the @dfn{standard} list format, e.g.@::

@example
@group
Mon, Jan   1st 1995: New Year's day
Mon, Jan   1st 1995: No fixed dates
@dots{}
@end group
@end example

Gcal uses the @dfn{alternative} list format, e.g.@::

@example
@group
Mon, Jan   1st 1995:
New Year's day
No fixed dates
@dots{}
@end group
@end example

@item e
@itemx --include-holidays=long
@arindex -e
@arindex -ce
@arindex --include-holidays=long
@cindex Fixed date text modifier, @option{e}
Enable inclusion of all built-in eternal holiday dates.  This includes
legal holidays and memorial days.

@item E
@itemx --include-holidays=short
@arindex -E
@arindex -cE
@arindex --include-holidays=short
@cindex Fixed date text modifier, @option{E}
Enable inclusion of those built-in eternal holiday dates which are legal
holidays only.

@need 1000
@item g@r{[}@var{text}@r{]}
@itemx --grouping-text@r{[}=@var{text}@r{]}
@arindex -g@r{[}@var{text}@r{]}
@arindex -cg@r{[}@var{text}@r{]}
@arindex --grouping-text@r{[}=@var{text}@r{]}
@cindex Fixed date text modifier, @option{g@r{[}@var{text}@r{]}}
Group fixed dates by day by using the @var{text} separator.  If @var{text}
is not given, the built-in @var{text}@footnote{@w{@code{RC_GROUP_SEP}}
``'' @equiv{} empty line only.} is used for grouping, e.g.@::

@example
@group
@cartouche
$ gcal -Cxw -cg
@print{}
@print{} Sun, Nov   6th 1994: Text 1
@print{} Sun, Nov   6th 1994: Text 2
@print{}
@print{} Mon, Nov   7th 1994: Text 3
@print{}
@print{} Tue, Nov   8th 1994: Text 4
@dots{}


$ gcal -Cxw -g'-A_user\_defined-~-grouping text-'
@print{}
@print{} Sun, Nov   6th 1994: Text 1
@print{} Sun, Nov   6th 1994: Text 2
@print{} -A user_defined-
@print{} -grouping text-
@print{} Mon, Nov   7th 1994: Text 3
@print{} -A user_defined-
@print{} -grouping text-
@print{} Tue, Nov   8th 1994: Text 4
@dots{}
@end cartouche
@end group
@end example

The @var{text} may contain references to global date and text variables
(@pxref{x-date-variable, , Fixed date option @w{@option{--date-variable=@var{argument}}}},
and
@ref{x-text-variable, , Fixed date option @w{@option{--date-variable=@var{argument}}}})@.
Furthermore, all special texts which cause a text replacement may be used in
the @var{text}
(@pxref{Replacements, , @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} special texts for text replacement})@.

@cindex Force line break-up
@cindex Line break-up character, @samp{~}
@cindex Line break-up character, @samp{^}
@cindex @samp{~} line break-up character
@cindex @samp{^} line break-up character
Each time a @samp{~} (tilde) or @samp{^} (caret) character is found in
@var{text}, this character is replaced by a real @samp{\n} (newline) character.

@cindex Depreciation of special characters
@cindex Special characters, depreciation
@cindex Depreciation character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} depreciation character
@cindex Protection of special characters
@cindex Special characters, protection
@cindex Protection character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} protection character
You may depreciate the special meaning of the @samp{~} (tilde) character
---in case this character itself is needed--- by placing a @samp{\}
(backslash) character before it, e.g.@: @samp{\~}@.  If you need the @samp{\~}
characters themselves, you have to protect the @samp{\} (backslash) character
by another @samp{\} (backslash) character, e.g.@: @samp{\\_}@.
All above mentioned facts are also valid for the @samp{^} (caret) character.

@cindex Pseudo space character, @samp{_}
@cindex @samp{_} pseudo space character
Each time a @samp{_} (underscore) character is found in @var{text}, this
character is replaced by a real @samp{ } (space) character.

@cindex Depreciation of special characters
@cindex Special characters, depreciation
@cindex Depreciation character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} depreciation character
@cindex Protection of special characters
@cindex Special characters, protection
@cindex Protection character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} protection character
You may depreciate the special meaning of the @samp{_} (underscore) character
---in case this character itself is needed--- by placing a @samp{\}
(backslash) character before it, e.g.@: @samp{\_}@.  If you need the @samp{\_}
characters themselves, you have to protect the @samp{\} (backslash) character
by another @samp{\} (backslash) character, e.g.@: @samp{\\_}@.

@need 1000
@item k
@itemx --include-week-number
@arindex -k
@arindex -ck
@arindex --include-week-number
@cindex Fixed date text modifier, @option{k}
@cindex @acronym{ISO}-8601:1988 week number
@cindex Week number, @acronym{ISO}-8601:1988
@cindex Standard week number
@cindex Week number, standard
The leading date of a fixed date message is either extended by the
@acronym{ISO} week number or the standard week number.
@xref{x-starting-day, , Calendar option @option{--starting-day=@var{argument}}},
@ref{x-iso-week-number, , Calendar option @option{--iso-week-number=yes@r{|}no}},
and
@ref{Internationalization, , Aspects in Internationalization},
for further details.

@item o
@itemx --omit-multiple-date-part
@arindex -o
@arindex -co
@arindex --omit-multiple-date-part
@cindex Fixed date text modifier, @option{o}
Omit displaying the leading date of a fixed date message in case more than one
message refers to that date@footnote{Only if the @option{--alternative-format}
option or the @option{A} modifier is not given.}, e.g.@::

@example
@group
@cartouche
$ gcal -cxo
@print{}
@print{} Sun, Nov   6th 1994: Text 1
@print{}                      Text 2
@dots{}
@end cartouche
@end group
@end example

@item Q
@itemx --suppress-fixed-dates-list-separator
@arindex -Q
@arindex -cQ
@arindex --suppress-fixed-dates-list-separator
@cindex Fixed date text modifier, @option{Q}
@cindex Fixed date list, suppression of leading blank line
@cindex Suppress leading blank line of fixed date list
Suppress displaying of the blank line which is always leading a fixed date
list.  For example, to cause Gcal to print only the number of days between
1st January 1970 and 1st January 1980, you can call the program like this:

@example
@group
@cartouche
$ gcal -f /dev/null -QUx %19800101 -#0_%j-2440588
@print{} 3652
@end cartouche
@end group
@end example

@item U
@itemx --suppress-date-part
@arindex -U
@arindex -cU
@arindex --suppress-date-part
@cindex Fixed date text modifier, @option{U}
Suppress displaying the leading date of a fixed date message, e.g.@::

@example
@group
@cartouche
$ gcal -cxU
@print{}
@print{} Text 1
@print{} Text 2
@dots{}
@end cartouche
@end group
@end example

@need 1000
@item J
@itemx --suppress-text-part
@arindex -J
@arindex -cJ
@arindex --suppress-text-part
@cindex Fixed date text modifier, @option{J}
Suppress displaying the text part of a fixed date message, e.g.@::

@example
@group
@cartouche
$ gcal -cxJ
@print{}
@print{} Sun, Nov   6th 1994:
@print{} Sun, Nov   6th 1994:
@dots{}
@end cartouche
@end group
@end example

@item x
@itemx --exclude-fixed-dates-list-title
@arindex -cx
@arindex --exclude-fixed-dates-list-title
@cindex Fixed date text modifier, @option{x}
@cindex Fixed date list, suppression of title text
@cindex Suppress title text of fixed date list
Suppress the title text line of the fixed date list.

@item --heading-text=@var{text}
@arindex --heading-text=@var{text}
@cindex Fixed date option, @option{--heading-text=@var{text}}
Changes the title text line of the fixed date list.  Instead of displaying
the default @samp{Fixed date list:} text, any other text can be used as
heading text of the fixed date list, e.g.@::

@example
@group
@cartouche
$ gcal -cUJ --heading-text=Hello,_it_is_%K_,~%t__o'clock
@print{}
@print{} Hello, it is Sunday,
@print{} 14:32 o'clock
@print{}
@print{} Sun, Nov   6th 1994:
@dots{}
@end cartouche
@end group
@end example

The @var{text} may contain references to global date and text variables
(@pxref{x-date-variable, , Fixed date option @w{@option{--date-variable=@var{argument}}}},
and
@ref{x-text-variable, , Fixed date option @w{@option{--date-variable=@var{argument}}}})@.
Furthermore, all special texts which cause a text replacement may be used in
the @var{text}
(@pxref{Replacements, , @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} special texts for text replacement})@.

@cindex Force line break-up
@cindex Line break-up character, @samp{~}
@cindex Line break-up character, @samp{^}
@cindex @samp{~} line break-up character
@cindex @samp{^} line break-up character
Each time a @samp{~} (tilde) or @samp{^} (caret) character is found in
@var{text}, this character is replaced by a real @samp{\n} (newline) character.

@cindex Depreciation of special characters
@cindex Special characters, depreciation
@cindex Depreciation character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} depreciation character
@cindex Protection of special characters
@cindex Special characters, protection
@cindex Protection character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} protection character
You may depreciate the special meaning of the @samp{~} (tilde) character
---in case this character itself is needed--- by placing a @samp{\}
(backslash) character before it, e.g.@: @samp{\~}@.  If you need the @samp{\~}
characters themselves, you have to protect the @samp{\} (backslash) character
by another @samp{\} (backslash) character, e.g.@: @samp{\\_}@.
All above mentioned facts are also valid for the @samp{^} (caret) character.

@cindex Pseudo space character, @samp{_}
@cindex @samp{_} pseudo space character
Each time a @samp{_} (underscore) character is found in @var{text}, this
character is replaced by a real @samp{ } (space) character.

@cindex Depreciation of special characters
@cindex Special characters, depreciation
@cindex Depreciation character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} depreciation character
@cindex Protection of special characters
@cindex Special characters, protection
@cindex Protection character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} protection character
You may depreciate the special meaning of the @samp{_} (underscore) character
---in case this character itself is needed--- by placing a @samp{\}
(backslash) character before it, e.g.@: @samp{\_}@.  If you need the @samp{\_}
characters themselves, you have to protect the @samp{\} (backslash) character
by another @samp{\} (backslash) character, e.g.@: @samp{\\_}@.

@item z
@itemx --include-consecutive-number
@arindex -z
@arindex -cz
@arindex --include-consecutive-number
@cindex Fixed date text modifier, @option{z}
Display consecutive numbers of fixed date messages.

@item Z
@itemx --zero-dates-only
@arindex -Z
@arindex -cZ
@arindex --zero-dates-only
@cindex Fixed date text modifier, @option{Z}
Display only those dates, for which fixed dates do not exist,
i.e.@: all ``empty'' fixed dates only consisting of the date.
@end table

@page
@cindex Fixed date period modifiers and options
@cindex Modifiers, fixed date period
@cindex Options, fixed date period
@noindent
@strong{Fixed date period modifiers and options:}

@table @option
@item --leap-day=february@r{|}march
@arindex --leap-day=february@r{|}march
@cindex Fixed date period option, @option{--leap-day=february@r{|}march}
@cindex Leap day
The @dfn{leap day}@footnote{The 29th February.} is observed in non-leap years.

@table @option
@item --leap-day=february
@arindex --leap-day=february
@cindex Fixed date period option, @option{--leap-day=february}
@cindex Move leap day to 28th February
A fixed date that appears in every year and which is related
to the leap day, is displayed on the 28th February in non-leap years.

@item --leap-day=march
@arindex --leap-day=march
@cindex Fixed date period option, @option{--leap-day=march}
@cindex Move leap day to 1st March
A fixed date that appears in every year and which is related
to the leap day, is displayed on the 1st March in non-leap years.
@end table

@item d
@itemx --include-today
@arindex -d
@arindex -cd
@arindex --include-today
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{d}
If lists of periods are generated, include the actual date into the list.
@xref{x-list-mode, , Fixed date option @option{--list-mode}},
how to create a list of periods.

@need 1000
@item l
@itemx --list-mode
@arindex -l
@arindex -cl
@arindex --list-mode
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{l}
@anchor{x-list-mode}
Generate a list of periods instead of a single period.
@end table
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@quotation
@strong{Please note:}@*
The following examples assumes the actual system date is the
@strong{17th February of any year} (00000217), weeks start on
Mondays and @acronym{ISO} week numbers are used!
@end quotation
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@table @asis
@item @option{--period-of-fixed-dates=@var{argument}}
@arindex --period-of-fixed-dates=@var{argument}
@anchor{x-period-of-fixed-dates}
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@item @option{@var{n}d}
@itemx @option{*d@var{n}}
@arindex -c@var{n}d
@arindex -*d@var{n}
@arindex -c*d@var{n}
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{@var{n}d}
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{*d@var{n}}
Single date of absolute day
@w{@var{n} @equiv{} @samp{1@r{@dots{}}365@r{|}366@r{|}999}}
of the actual year; the intensity level is the same as the simple @option{-c}
option.  If the value 999 for @var{n} is given, the last day of the year
(31st December) is assumed.

@itemize @bullet
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -c10d} respectively
@w{@samp{gcal --period-of-fixed-dates=10d}}
or @samp{gcal -c*d10} respectively
@w{@samp{gcal --period-of-fixed-dates=*d10}}
displays all fixed dates which occur on the 10th day of the year.
@end itemize

@need 1000
@item @option{l@var{n}d}
@itemx @option{l*d@var{n}}
@arindex -l@var{n}d
@arindex -cl@var{n}d
@arindex -l*d@var{n}
@arindex -cl*d@var{n}
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{l@var{n}d}
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{l*d@var{n}}
List dates starting yesterday or tomorrow (depending on the given day
number @var{n}) and ending on the @w{@var{n}'th} absolute day of the
actual year; the intensity level is the same as the @option{-cy} option.

@itemize @bullet
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cl10d} respectively @samp{gcal -cl*d10} displays
a list of all fixed dates which start on the 10th day of year
and end on the 16th February.
@end itemize

@page
@item @option{@var{n}+@r{|}-}
@arindex -c@var{n}+@r{|}-
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{@var{n}+@r{|}-}
Single date of day
@ifnottex
@emph{actual day @w{@samp{+@r{/}-}} @var{n} days}
@end ifnottex
@tex
\emph{actual day $\pm$ \smartslanted{n} days}
@end tex
of the actual year; the intensity level is the same as the simple @option{-c}
option.

@itemize @bullet
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -c10+} displays all fixed dates which occur
10 days after the 17th February (today)@.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -c10-} displays all fixed dates which occur
10 days before the 17th February (today)@.
@end itemize

@item @option{l@var{n}+@r{|}-}
@arindex -l@var{n}+@r{|}-
@arindex -cl@var{n}+@r{|}-
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{l@var{n}+@r{|}-}
List dates starting yesterday @samp{-} or tomorrow @samp{+} and ending on
@ifnottex
@emph{actual day @w{@samp{+@r{/}-}} @var{n} days}
@end ifnottex
@tex
\emph{actual day $\pm$ \smartslanted{n} days}
@end tex
of the actual year; the intensity level is the same as the @option{-cy} option.

@itemize @bullet
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cl10+} displays a list of all fixed dates which start
on the 18th February and end 10 days after.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cl10-} displays a list of all fixed dates which start
10 days before the 16th February and end on the 16th February.
@end itemize

@need 1000
@item @option{@var{n}w}
@arindex -c@var{n}w
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{@var{n}w}
@cindex @acronym{ISO}-8601:1988 week number
@cindex Week number, @acronym{ISO}-8601:1988
@cindex Standard week number
@cindex Week number, standard
Single dates of week number
@w{@var{n} @equiv{} @samp{0@r{|}1@r{@dots{}}52@r{|}53@r{|}99}}
of the actual year; the intensity level is the same as the @option{-cw} option.
@xref{x-starting-day, , Calendar option @option{--starting-day=@var{argument}}},
@ref{x-iso-week-number, , Calendar option @option{--iso-week-number=yes@r{|}no}},
and
@ref{Internationalization, , Aspects in Internationalization},
for more details.

@itemize @bullet
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -c0w} displays all fixed dates which occur
in the 53rd week of the previous year, in case the previous year
has a 53rd week.  If the previous year has no 53rd week, all fixed
dates occurring in the 1st week of the actual year are displayed.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -c6w} displays all fixed dates which occur
in the 6th week of year.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -c52w} displays all fixed dates which occur
in the 52nd week of year.

@item
@cindex Error code 126
@cindex Exit code 126
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -c53w} displays all fixed dates which occur
in the 53rd week of the actual year, in case the actual year
has a 53rd week.  If the actual year has no 53rd week, no fixed date
messages are displayed and the program is terminated with an error code.
@xref{x-126-Error-code, , Error Code 126}.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -c99w} displays all fixed dates which occur
in the last week of the actual year, i.e.@ either the 52nd or the
53rd week.
@end itemize

@item @option{l@var{n}w}
@arindex -l@var{n}w
@arindex -cl@var{n}w
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{l@var{n}w}
@cindex @acronym{ISO}-8601:1988 week number
@cindex Week number, @acronym{ISO}-8601:1988
@cindex Standard week number
@cindex Week number, standard
List dates starting yesterday or tomorrow (depending on the given week
number @var{n}) and ending on the first respectively last day of given week
number @w{@var{n} @equiv{} @samp{0@r{|}1@r{@dots{}}52@r{|}53@r{|}99}} of the
actual year; the intensity level is the same as the @option{-cy} option.
@xref{x-starting-day, , Calendar option @option{--starting-day=@var{argument}}},
@ref{x-iso-week-number, , Calendar option @option{--iso-week-number=yes@r{|}no}},
and
@ref{Internationalization, , Aspects in Internationalization},
for further details.

@itemize @bullet
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cl12w} displays a list of all fixed dates which start
on the 18th February and end on the last day of the 12th week.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cl3w} displays a list of all fixed dates which start
on the first day of the 3rd week and end on the 16th February.
@end itemize

@need 1000
@item @option{@var{mm}@var{dd}}
@arindex -c@var{mm}@var{dd}
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{@var{mm}@var{dd}}
Single date of day @var{dd} in month @var{mm} of the actual year;
the intensity level is the same as the simple @option{-c} option.

@itemize @bullet
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -c0225} displays all fixed dates which occur
on the 25th February.
@end itemize

@item @option{l@var{mm}@var{dd}}
@arindex -l@var{mm}@var{dd}
@arindex -cl@var{mm}@var{dd}
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{0@var{mm}@var{dd}}
List dates starting yesterday or tomorrow (depending on the value given in
@var{mm}@var{dd}) and ending on day @var{dd} of month @var{mm} of the actual
year; the intensity level is the same as the @option{-cy} option.

@itemize @bullet
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cl0225} displays a list of all fixed dates which start
on the 18th February and end on the 25th February.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cl0109} displays a list of all fixed dates which start
on the 9th January and end on the 16th February.
@end itemize

@item @option{@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}}
@arindex -c@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}}
Single date of @w{@var{n}'th @equiv{} @samp{1@r{@dots{}}5@r{|}9}} weekday
@w{@var{dd}|@var{www}} in month @var{mm} of the actual year;
the intensity level is the same as the simple @option{-c} option.

@itemize @bullet
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -c01mon3} displays all fixed dates which occur
on the 3rd Monday in January.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -c02fri9} displays all fixed dates which occur
on the last Friday in February.
@end itemize

@item @option{l@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}}
@arindex -l@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}
@arindex -cl@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{l@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}}
List dates starting yesterday or tomorrow (depending on the value given
in @w{@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}}) and ending on @w{@var{n}'th @equiv{}
@samp{1@r{@dots{}}5@r{|}9}} weekday @var{dd} of month @var{mm} of the
actual year; the intensity level is the same as the @option{-cy} option.

@itemize @bullet
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cl01mon3} displays a list of all fixed dates which start
on the 3rd Monday in January and end on the 16th February.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cl02fri9} displays a list of all fixed dates which start
on the 18th February and end on the last Friday in February.
@end itemize

@item @option{*d@var{n}@var{www}}
@arindex -*d@var{n}@var{www}
@arindex -c*d@var{n}@var{www}
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{*d@var{n}@var{www}}
Single date of
@w{@var{n}'th @equiv{} @samp{1@r{@dots{}}51@r{|}52@r{|}53@r{|}99}}
weekday @var{www} of the actual year; the intensity level is the same as the
simple @option{-c} option.

@itemize @bullet
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -c*d16sun} displays all fixed dates which occur on the
16th Sunday of the actual year.

@item
@cindex Error code 126
@cindex Exit code 126
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -c*d52sun} displays all fixed dates which occur on the
52nd Sunday of the actual year.  If the actual year has no 52nd Sunday, no
fixed date messages are displayed and the program is terminated with an error
code.
@xref{x-126-Error-code, , Error Code 126}.

@item
@cindex Error code 126
@cindex Exit code 126
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -c*d53sun} displays all fixed dates which occur on the
53rd Sunday of the actual year.  If the actual year has no 53rd Sunday, no
fixed date messages are displayed and the program is terminated with an error
code.
@xref{x-126-Error-code, , Error Code 126}.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -c*d99sun} displays all fixed dates which occur on the
last Sunday@footnote{That is either the 51st, 52nd or 53rd Sunday.} of the
actual year.
@end itemize

@page
@item @option{l*d@var{n}@var{www}}
@arindex -l*d@var{n}@var{www}
@arindex -cl*d@var{n}@var{www}
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{l*d@var{n}@var{www}}
List dates starting yesterday or tomorrow (depending on the value given
in @var{n}) and ending on
@w{@var{n}'th @equiv{} @samp{1@r{@dots{}}51@r{|}52@r{|}53@r{|}99}}
weekday @var{www} of the actual year; the intensity level is the same as the
@option{-cy} option.

@itemize @bullet
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cl*d16sun} displays a list of all fixed dates which start
on the 18th February and end on the 16th Sunday of the actual year.

@item
@cindex Error code 126
@cindex Exit code 126
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cl*d52sun} displays a list of all fixed dates which start
on the 18th February and end on the 52nd Sunday of the actual year.  If the
actual year has no 52nd Sunday, no fixed date messages are displayed and the
program is terminated with an error code.
@xref{x-126-Error-code, , Error Code 126}.

@item
@cindex Error code 126
@cindex Exit code 126
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cl*d53sun} displays a list of all fixed dates which start
on the 18th February and end on the 53nd Sunday of the actual year.  If the
actual year has no 53nd Sunday, no fixed date messages are displayed and the
program is terminated with an error code.
@xref{x-126-Error-code, , Error Code 126}.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cl*d99sun} displays a list of all fixed dates which start
on the 18th February and end on the last Sunday@footnote{That is either the
51st, 52nd or 53rd Sunday.} of the actual year.
@end itemize

@item @option{*w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}}
@arindex -*w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}
@arindex -c*w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{*w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}}
@cindex @acronym{ISO}-8601:1988 week number
@cindex Week number, @acronym{ISO}-8601:1988
@cindex Standard week number
@cindex Week number, standard
Single date of weekday @var{www} of
@w{@var{n}'th @equiv{} @samp{0@r{|}1@r{@dots{}}52@r{|}53@r{|}99}}
week of the actual year; the intensity level is the same as the simple
@option{-c} option.  If no weekday @var{www} is given, the starting day
of the week is assumed for the weekday @var{www}@.
@xref{x-starting-day, , Calendar option @option{--starting-day=@var{argument}}},
@ref{x-iso-week-number, , Calendar option @option{--iso-week-number=yes@r{|}no}},
and
@ref{Internationalization, , Aspects in Internationalization},
for more details.

@itemize @bullet
@item
@cindex Error code 126
@cindex Exit code 126
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -c*w0sun} displays all fixed dates which occur on the
Sunday of the 52nd respectively 53rd week of the previous year.  In case
such a Sunday does not exist, no fixed date messages are displayed and the
program is terminated with an error code.
@xref{x-126-Error-code, , Error Code 126}.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -c*w16sun} displays all fixed dates which occur on
the Sunday of the 16th week of the actual year.

@item
@cindex Error code 126
@cindex Exit code 126
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -c*w52sun} displays all fixed dates which occur on the
Sunday of the 52nd week of the actual year.  If the actual year has no
Sunday of the 52nd week, no fixed date messages are displayed and the
program is terminated with an error code.
@xref{x-126-Error-code, , Error Code 126}.

@item
@cindex Error code 126
@cindex Exit code 126
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -c*w53sun} displays all fixed dates which occur on the
Sunday of the 53rd week of the actual year.  If the actual year has no
Sunday of the 53rd week, no fixed date messages are displayed and the
program is terminated with an error code.
@xref{x-126-Error-code, , Error Code 126}.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -c*w99sun} displays all fixed dates which occur on the
last Sunday@footnote{That is either the Sunday of the 51st, 52nd or 53rd
week.} of the actual year.
@end itemize

@item @option{l*w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}}
@arindex -l*w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}
@arindex -cl*w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{l*w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}}
@cindex @acronym{ISO}-8601:1988 week number
@cindex Week number, @acronym{ISO}-8601:1988
@cindex Standard week number
@cindex Week number, standard
List dates starting yesterday or tomorrow (depending on the value given
in @var{n}) and ending on weekday @var{www} of
@w{@var{n}'th @equiv{} @samp{0@r{|}1@r{@dots{}}52@r{|}53@r{|}99}}
week of the actual year; the intensity level is the same as the
@option{-cy} option.  If no weekday @var{www} is given, the starting
day of the week is assumed for the weekday @var{www}@.
@xref{x-starting-day, , Calendar option @option{--starting-day=@var{argument}}},
@ref{x-iso-week-number, , Calendar option @option{--iso-week-number=yes@r{|}no}},
and
@ref{Internationalization, , Aspects in Internationalization},
for further details.

@itemize @bullet
@item
@cindex Error code 126
@cindex Exit code 126
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cl*w0sun} displays a list of all fixed dates which start
on the Sunday of the 52nd respectively 53rd week of the previous year and end
on the 16th February.  In case such a Sunday does not exist, no fixed date
messages are displayed and the program is terminated with an error code.
@xref{x-126-Error-code, , Error Code 126}.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cl*w16sun} displays a list of all fixed dates which start
on the 18th February and end on the Sunday of the 16th week of the actual year.

@item
@cindex Error code 126
@cindex Exit code 126
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cl*w52sun} displays a list of all fixed dates which start
on the 18th February and end on the Sunday of the 52nd week of the actual
year.  If the actual year has no Sunday of the 52nd week, no fixed date
messages are displayed and the program is terminated with an error code.
@xref{x-126-Error-code, , Error Code 126}.

@item
@cindex Error code 126
@cindex Exit code 126
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cl*w53sun} displays a list of all fixed dates which start
on the 18th February and end on the Sunday of the 53rd week of the actual
year.  If the actual year has no Sunday of the 53rd week, no fixed date
messages are displayed and the program is terminated with an error code.
@xref{x-126-Error-code, , Error Code 126}.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cl*w99sun} displays a list of all fixed dates which start
on the 18th February and end on the last Sunday@footnote{That is either the
Sunday of the 51st, 52nd or 53rd week.} of the actual year.
@end itemize

@item @option{@@e@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{]}}
@arindex -@@e@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{]}
@arindex -c@@e@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{]}
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{@@e@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{]}}
Single date of day @var{n} relative to the Easter Sunday's date of the actual
year; the intensity level is the same as the simple @option{-c} option.

@itemize @bullet
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -c@@e} displays all fixed dates which occur
on the Easter Sunday's date.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -c@@e10} respectively @samp{gcal -c@@e+10} displays all
fixed dates which occur 10 days after the Easter Sunday's date.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -c@@e-10} displays all fixed dates which occur
10 days before the Easter Sunday's date.
@end itemize

@page
@item @option{l@@e@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{]}}
@arindex -l@@e@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{]}
@arindex -cl@@e@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{]}
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{l@@e@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{]}}
List dates starting yesterday or tomorrow (depending on the value
given in @var{n}) and ending on @w{@var{n}'th} day relative to the Easter
Sunday's date of the actual year; the intensity level is the same as the
@option{-cy} option.

@itemize @bullet
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cl@@e} displays a list of all fixed dates which start
on the 18th February and end on the Easter Sunday's date.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cl@@e10} respectively @samp{gcal -cl@@e+10} displays
a list of all fixed dates which start on the 18th February and end 10 days
after the Easter Sunday's date.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cl@@e-10} displays a list of all fixed dates which start
on the 18th February and end 10 days before the Easter Sunday's date.
@end itemize

@item @option{@@e@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}}
@arindex -@@e@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}
@arindex -c@@e@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{@@e@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}}
Single date of @w{@var{n}'th} weekday @var{www} relative to the Easter Sunday's
date of the actual year; the intensity level is the same as the simple
@option{-c} option.

@itemize @bullet
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -c@@e3fri} respectively @samp{gcal -c@@e+3fri}
displays all fixed dates which occur on the 3rd Friday after the Easter
Sunday's date.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -c@@e-3fri} displays all fixed dates which occur
on the 3rd Friday before the Easter Sunday's date.
@end itemize

@item @option{l@@e@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}}
@arindex -l@@e@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}
@arindex -cl@@e@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{l@@e@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}}
List dates starting yesterday or tomorrow (depending on the value
given in @var{n}) and ending on @w{@var{n}'th} weekday @var{www} relative to
the Easter Sunday's date of the actual year; the intensity level is the same
as the @option{-cy} option.

@itemize @bullet
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cl@@e3fri} respectively @samp{gcal -cl@@e+3fri}
displays a list of all fixed dates which start on the 18th February and
end on the 3rd Friday after the Easter Sunday's date.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cl@@e-3fri} displays a list of all fixed dates which
start on the 18th February and end on the 3rd Friday before the Easter
Sunday's date.
@end itemize

@item @option{@@t@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{]}}
@arindex -@@t@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{]}
@arindex -c@@t@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{]}
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{@@t@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{]}}
Single date of day @var{n} relative to today's date of the actual year;
the intensity level is the same as the simple @option{-c} option.

@itemize @bullet
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -c@@t} displays all fixed dates which occur
on today's date (@equiv{} @samp{gcal -c})@.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -c@@t10} respectively @samp{gcal -c@@t+10} displays
all fixed dates which occur 10 days after today's date
(@equiv{} @samp{gcal -c10+})@.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -c@@t-10} displays all fixed dates which occur
10 days before today's date (@equiv{} @samp{gcal -c10-})@.
@end itemize

@page
@item @option{l@@t@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{]}}
@arindex -l@@t@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{]}
@arindex -cl@@t@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{]}
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{l@@t@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{]}}
List dates starting yesterday or tomorrow (depending on the value given in
@var{n}) and ending on @w{@var{n}'th} day relative to today's date of the
actual year; the intensity level is the same as the @option{-cy} option.

@itemize @bullet
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cl@@t} displays nothing.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cl@@t10} respectively @samp{gcal -cl@@t+10}
displays a list of all fixed dates which start on the 18th February
and end 10 days after today's date (@equiv{} @samp{gcal -cl10+})@.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cl@@t-10} displays a list of all fixed dates which start
on the 18th February and end 10 days before today's date
(@equiv{} @samp{gcal -cl10-})@.
@end itemize

@item @option{@@t@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}}
@arindex -@@t@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}
@arindex -c@@t@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{@@t@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}}
Single date of @w{@var{n}'th} weekday @var{www} relative to today's date of the
actual year; the intensity level is the same as the simple @option{-c} option.

@itemize @bullet
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -c@@t3fri} respectively @samp{gcal -c@@t+3fri}
displays all fixed dates which occur on the 3rd Friday after today's date.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -c@@t-3fri} displays all fixed dates which occur
on the 3rd Friday before today's date.
@end itemize

@need 1500
@item @option{l@@t@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}}
@arindex -l@@t@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}
@arindex -cl@@t@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{l@@t@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}}
List dates starting yesterday or tomorrow (depending on the value
given in @var{n}) and ending on @w{@var{n}'th} weekday @var{www} relative
to today's date of the actual year; the intensity level is the same as the
@option{-cy} option.

@itemize @bullet
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cl@@t3fri} respectively @samp{gcal -cl@@t+3fri}
displays a list of all fixed dates which start on the 18th February
and end on the 3rd Friday after today's date.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cl@@t-3fri} displays a list of all fixed dates which
start on the 18th February and end on the 3rd Friday before today's date.
@end itemize

@item @option{@@@var{dvar}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{]}}
@arindex -@@@var{dvar}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{]}
@arindex -c@@@var{dvar}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{]}
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{@@@var{dvar}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{]}}
Single date of the day @var{n} relative to that date of the actual year,
which is referenced by the date variable @var{dvar};
the intensity level is the same as the simple @option{-c} option.

@itemize @bullet
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -v a=0422 -c@@a} displays all fixed dates which occur
on the 22nd April.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -v a=0422 -c@@a10} respectively
@samp{gcal -v a=0422 -c@@a+10} displays all fixed dates
which occur 10 days after the 22nd April.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -v a=0422 -c@@a-10} displays all fixed dates which occur
10 days before the 22nd April.
@end itemize

@page
@item @option{l@@@var{dvar}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{]}}
@arindex -l@@@var{dvar}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{]}
@arindex -cl@@@var{dvar}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{]}
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{l@@@var{dvar}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{]}}
List dates starting yesterday or tomorrow (depending on the value given in
@var{n}) and ending on the @w{@var{n}'th} day relative to that date of the
actual year, which is referenced by the date variable @var{dvar};
the intensity level is the same as the @option{-cy} option.

@itemize @bullet
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -v a=0422 -cl@@a} displays a list of all fixed dates which
start on the 18th February and end on the 22nd April.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -v a=0422 -cl@@a10} respectively
@samp{gcal -v a=0422 -cl@@a+10} displays a list of all fixed dates
which start on the 18th February and end 10 days after the 22nd April.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -v a=0422 -cl@@a-10} displays a list of all fixed dates
which start on the 18th February and end 10 days before the 22nd April.
@end itemize

@item @option{@@@var{dvar}@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}}
@arindex -@@@var{dvar}@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}
@arindex -c@@@var{dvar}@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{@@@var{dvar}@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}}
Single date of the @w{@var{n}'th} weekday @var{www} relative to that date
of the actual year, which is referenced by the date variable @var{dvar};
the intensity level is the same as the simple @option{-c} option.

@itemize @bullet
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -v a=0122 -c@@a2sat} respectively
@samp{gcal -v a=0122 -c@@a+2sat} displays all fixed dates
which occur on the 2nd Saturday after the 22nd January.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -v a=0122 -c@@a-2sat} displays all fixed dates which occur
on the 2nd Saturday before the 22nd January.
@end itemize

@need 1500
@item @option{l@@@var{dvar}@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}}
@arindex -l@@@var{dvar}@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}
@arindex -cl@@@var{dvar}@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{l@@@var{dvar}@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}}
List dates starting yesterday or tomorrow (depending on the value given in
@var{n}) and ending on the @w{@var{n}'th} weekday @var{www} relative to that
date of the actual year, which is referenced by the date variable @var{dvar};
the intensity level is the same as the @option{-cy} option.

@itemize @bullet
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -v a=0122 -cl@@a2sat} respectively
@samp{gcal -v a=0122 -cl@@a+2sat} displays a list of all fixed dates
which start on the 2nd Saturday after the 22nd January
and end on the 16th February.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -v a=0122 -cl@@a-2sat} displays a list of all fixed dates
which start on the 2nd Saturday before the 22nd January and end on the
16th February.
@end itemize

@item @option{t@r{|}T}
@itemx @option{--tomorrow} long-style option
@arindex -c@r{[}t@r{|}T@r{]}
@arindex -t
@arindex -ct
@arindex -T
@arindex -cT
@arindex --tomorrow
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{t@r{|}T}
@cindex Fixed date period long-style option, @option{--tomorrow}
@cindex Fixed dates for @emph{tomorrow}
@cindex Tomorrows' fixed dates
List dates related to tomorrow.

@itemize @bullet
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -ct} displays all fixed dates which occur
on the 18th February (tomorrow)@.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cdt} displays all fixed dates which occur
on the 17th February (today) and on the 18th February (tomorrow)@.
@end itemize

@page
@item @option{w@r{|}W@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}}
@itemx @option{--week} long-style option
@itemx @option{--end-of-week} long-style option
@itemx @option{--start-of-week} long-style option
@arindex -w
@arindex -w@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@r{]}
@arindex -W
@arindex -W@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@r{]}
@arindex -w@r{|}W@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@r{]}
@arindex -c@r{[}w@r{|}W@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@r{]}
@arindex --week
@arindex --end-of-week
@arindex --start-of-week
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{w@r{|}W@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}}
@cindex Fixed date period long-style option, @option{--week}
@cindex Fixed date period long-style option, @option{--end-of-week}
@cindex Fixed date period long-style option, @option{--start-of-week}
@cindex Fixed dates for the @emph{week}
@cindex Weeks' fixed dates
Display dates related to the week.@*
@xref{x-starting-day, , Calendar option @option{--starting-day=@var{argument}}}.

@itemize @bullet
@item
@option{w} or @option{--week} long-style option@*
@arindex -w
@arindex -cw
@arindex --week
List dates between the @emph{starting day} of the current week
and the last day of the current week

@itemize @minus
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cw} displays all fixed dates which occur
in the whole week the 17th February is part of.
@end itemize

@item
@option{w+} or @option{--end-of-week} long-style option@*
@arindex -w+
@arindex -cw+
@arindex --end-of-week
List dates between the day after the current day of the current week
and the last day of the current week.

@itemize @minus
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cw+} displays all fixed dates which start on the
18th February (tomorrow) and end on the last day of the week.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cdw+} displays all fixed dates which start on the
17th February (today) and end on the last day of the week.
@end itemize

@item
@option{w-} or @option{--start-of-week} long-style option@*
@arindex -w-
@arindex -cw-
@arindex --start-of-week
List dates between the @emph{starting day} of the current week
and the day before the current day of the current week

@itemize @minus
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cw-} displays all fixed dates which start on the
first day of the week and end on the 16th February (yesterday)@.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cdw-} displays all fixed dates which start on the
first day of the week and end on the 17th February (today)@.
@end itemize
@end itemize

@item @option{m@r{|}M@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}}
@itemx @option{--month} long-style option
@itemx @option{--end-of-month} long-style option
@itemx @option{--start-of-month} long-style option
@arindex -m
@arindex -m@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@r{]}
@arindex -M
@arindex -M@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@r{]}
@arindex -m@r{|}M@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@r{]}
@arindex -c@r{[}m@r{|}M@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@r{]}
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{m@r{|}M@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}}
@cindex Fixed date period long-style option, @option{--month}
@cindex Fixed date period long-style option, @option{--end-of-month}
@cindex Fixed date period long-style option, @option{--start-of-month}
@cindex Fixed dates for the @emph{month}
@cindex Months' fixed dates
Display dates related to the month.

@itemize @bullet
@item
@option{m} or @option{--month} long-style option@*
@arindex -m
@arindex -cm
@arindex --month
List dates between the first day of the current month
and the last day of the current month.

@itemize @minus
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cm} displays all fixed dates which occur
in the whole month of February.
@end itemize

@item
@option{m+} or @option{--end-of-month} long-style option@*
@arindex -m+
@arindex -cm+
@arindex --end-of-month
List dates between the day after the current day of the current month
and the last day of the current month.

@itemize @minus
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cm+} displays all fixed dates which start on the
18th February (tomorrow) and end on the last day of the month February.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cdm+} displays all fixed dates which start on the
17th February (today) and end on the last day of the month February.
@end itemize

@need 1000
@item
@option{m-} or @option{--start-of-month} long-style option@*
@arindex -m-
@arindex -cm-
@arindex --start-of-month
List dates between the first day of the current month
and the day before the current day of the current month.

@itemize @minus
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cm-} displays all fixed dates which start on the
first day of the month February and end on the 16th February (yesterday)@.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cdm-} displays all fixed dates which start on the
first day of the month February and end on the 17th February (today)@.
@end itemize
@end itemize

@item @option{y@r{|}Y@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}}
@itemx @option{--year} long-style option
@itemx @option{--end-of-year} long-style option
@itemx @option{--start-of-year} long-style option
@arindex -y
@arindex -y@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@r{]}
@arindex -Y
@arindex -Y@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@r{]}
@arindex -y@r{|}Y@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@r{]}
@arindex -c@r{[}y@r{|}Y@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@r{]}
@cindex Fixed date period modifier, @option{y@r{|}Y@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}}
@cindex Fixed date period long-style option, @option{--year}
@cindex Fixed date period long-style option, @option{--end-of-year}
@cindex Fixed date period long-style option, @option{--start-of-year}
@cindex Fixed dates for the @emph{year}
@cindex Years' fixed dates
Display dates related to the year.

@itemize @bullet
@item
@option{y} or @option{--year} long-style option@*
@arindex -y
@arindex -cy
@arindex --year
List dates between the first day of the current year
and the last day of the current year.

@itemize @minus
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cy} displays all fixed dates which occur
in the whole year.
@end itemize

@item
@option{y+} or @option{--end-of-year} long-style option@*
@arindex -y+
@arindex -cy+
@arindex --end-of-year
List dates between the day after the current day of the current year
and the last day of the current year.

@itemize @minus
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cy+} displays all fixed dates which start on the
18th February (tomorrow) and end on the last day of the year.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cdy+} displays all fixed dates which start on the
17th February (today) and end on the last day of the year.
@end itemize

@item
@option{y-} or @option{--start-of-year} long-style option@*
@arindex -y-
@arindex -cy-
@arindex --start-of-year
List dates between the first day of the current year
and the day before the current day of the current year.

@itemize @minus
@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cy-} displays all fixed dates which start on the
first day of the year and end on the 16th February (yesterday)@.

@item
E.g.@: @samp{gcal -cdy-} displays all fixed dates which start on the
first day of the year and end on the 17th February (today)@.
@end itemize
@end itemize
@end table

@page
@node Response file, Actual date modifier, Options, Command line arguments
@subsection Response file
@cindex Response file, @option{@@@var{file}}
@cindex @option{@@@var{file}} response file
@cindex Command line argument @option{@@@var{file}}
@cindex @option{@@@var{file}}, command line argument
@cindex Quotation of special characters
@cindex Special characters, quotation
@cindex Depreciation of special characters
@cindex Special characters, depreciation
@cindex Protection of special characters
@cindex Special characters, protection
@arindex @@@var{file}

If a @option{@@@var{file}} command line argument is given, a
@dfn{response file} by the name of @var{file} will be used,
i.e.@: options and commands are preloaded from that file.
A response @var{file} may contain options and commands ---which
are preloaded by Gcal---, but @strong{no} references to further
response files.  If such references to further response files
are found, they are ignored.
@xref{x-response-file, , Global option @option{--response-file=@var{name}}},
for hints how to generate a response file automatically.

The searching scheme for a response file is the same as that for resource
files, except @strong{no} standard response file is respected.
@xref{x-File-searching-mechanism, , File searching mechanism},
for more details.  Multiple response files may be given in the command line
when Gcal is started, and they are processed exactly in that order as given,
i.e.@: strictly sequential.

@cindex Comment character, @samp{;}
@cindex @samp{;} comment character
@cindex Remark character, @samp{;}
@cindex @samp{;} remark character
Each option and command must be on a single line, i.e.@: separated by a
real @samp{\n} (newline) character.  A line beginning with a @samp{;}
(semicolon) character in the response file is treated as a remark and
will not be used by Gcal
(@pxref{Comment line})@.

Options must be defined before commands.  If a response file contains any
commands, then all further arguments after the @option{@@@var{file}} option
of the command line are ignored.

@noindent
For example:

@enumerate 1
@item
Contents of response file @file{file}:

@example
@group
Line     Text
1        -j
2        -Cw
@var{EOF}

@cartouche
$ gcal -i -b 3 @@file -s 3 1994

@expansion{} gcal -i -b 3 -j -Cw -s 3 1994
@end cartouche
@end group
@end example

@item
Contents of response file @file{file}:

@example
@group
Line     Text
1        -j
2        -Cw
3        may 1992
@var{EOF}

@cartouche
$ gcal -i -b 3 @@file -s 3 1994

@expansion{} gcal -i -b 3 -j -Cw may
@end cartouche
@end group
@end example

@page
@item
Contents of response file @file{file}:

@example
@group
Line     Text
1        -j
2        -Cw
3        may
4        1992
@var{EOF}

@cartouche
$ gcal -i -b 3 @@file -s 3 1994

@expansion{} gcal -i -b 3 -j -Cw may 1992
@end cartouche
@end group
@end example
@end enumerate

@page
@node Actual date modifier, Commands, Response file, Command line arguments
@subsection Actual date modifier
@cindex Actual date modifier, @option{%@var{date}}
@cindex @option{%@var{date}} actual date modifier
@cindex Command line argument @option{%@var{date}}
@cindex @option{%@var{date}}, command line argument
@arindex %@var{date}

It is allowed to use that date ---instead of the actual system date--- which
is defined by the @option{%@var{date}} command line argument.  This means,
fixed dates can be checked for @strong{any} year and are respected in the
same way, as if they would be fixed dates of the actual year.

@tbindex Date formats of actual date modifier
@tbindex Actual date modifier, date formats
The date must be denoted in one of these formats:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@r{[}@var{mm}@r{[}@var{dd}@r{|}@var{www}@var{n}@r{]]}}}

@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}*d@r{|}w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}}}

@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@@e@r{|}t@r{|}@var{dvar}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]]}}}

@item
@w{@code{@var{month name}@r{[}@var{dd}@r{]}}}

@item
@w{@code{@var{weekday name}@r{[}@var{n}@r{]}}}

@item
@w{@var{dd}}
@end itemize
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@noindent
Some examples to this:

@quotation
@strong{Please note:}@*
The following examples assumes the actual system date is
@strong{Wednesday, the 17th February 1993} (19930217), weeks
start on Mondays and @acronym{ISO} week numbers are used!
@end quotation

@table @asis
@item The @code{@var{yyyy}@r{[}@var{mm}@r{[}@var{dd}@r{|}@var{www}@var{n}@r{]]}} format:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@samp{gcal %1994} @w{(@equiv{} @var{yyyy})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 17th February 1994
@w{@result{} 19940217@.}

@need 1000
@item
@samp{gcal %1994Mar}

@item
@samp{gcal %19943}

@item
@samp{gcal %199403} @w{(@equiv{} @var{yyyy}@var{mm})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 17th March 1994
@w{@result{} 19940317@.}

@item
@samp{gcal %1994Mar3}

@item
@samp{gcal %1994033}

@item
@samp{gcal %19940303} @w{(@equiv{} @var{yyyy}@var{mm}@var{dd})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 3rd March 1994
@w{@result{} 19940303@.}

@need 1000
@item
@samp{gcal %1994MarWed3}

@item
@samp{gcal %199403wed3} @w{(@equiv{} @var{yyyy}@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 3rd Wednesday in March 1994
@w{(@var{n} @equiv{} @samp{1@r{@dots{}}5@r{|}9})} @w{@result{} 19940316@.}

@item
@samp{gcal %0}

@item
@samp{gcal %00}

@item
@samp{gcal %000}

@item
@samp{gcal %0000} @w{(@equiv{} @var{yyyy})}@*
The actual date remains unchanged @w{@result{} 19930217@.}

@page
@item
@samp{gcal %0000Mar}

@item
@samp{gcal %00003}

@item
@samp{gcal %000003} @w{(@equiv{} @var{yyyy}@var{mm})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 17th March 1993
@w{@result{} 19930317@.}

@item
@samp{gcal %0000Mar3}

@item
@samp{gcal %0000033}

@item
@samp{gcal %00000303} @w{(@equiv{} @var{yyyy}@var{mm}@var{dd})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 3rd March 1993
@w{@result{} 19930303@.}

@item
@samp{gcal %0000MarWed3}

@item
@samp{gcal %000003wed3} @w{(@equiv{} @var{yyyy}@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 3rd Wednesday in March 1993
@w{(@var{n} @equiv{} @samp{1@r{@dots{}}5@r{|}9})} @w{@result{} 19930317@.}
@end itemize

@need 1000
@item The @code{@var{yyyy}*d@r{|}w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}} format:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@samp{gcal %1994*d10} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}*d@var{n}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 10th absolute day in 1994
@w{(@var{n} @equiv{} @samp{1@r{@dots{}}365@r{|}366@r{|}999})}
@w{@result{} 19940110@.}

@item
@samp{gcal %1994*d10sun} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}*d@var{n}@var{www}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 10th Sunday in 1994
@w{(@var{n} @equiv{} @samp{1@r{@dots{}}51@r{|}52@r{|}53@r{|}99})}
@w{@result{} 19940306@.}

@item
@samp{gcal %0*d10} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}*d@var{n}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 10th absolute day in 1993
@w{@result{} 19930110@.}

@item
@samp{gcal %0*d10sun} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}*d@var{n}@var{www}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 10th Sunday in 1993
@w{@result{} 19930307@.}

@item
@samp{gcal %1994*w10} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}*w@var{n}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date Monday of the 10th week in 1994@*
@w{(@var{n} @equiv{} @samp{0@r{|}1@r{@dots{}}52@r{|}53@r{|}99})}
@w{@result{} 19940307@.}

@item
@samp{gcal %1994*w10sun} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}*w@var{n}@var{www}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date Sunday of the 10th week in 1994
@w{@result{} 19940313@.}

@item
@samp{gcal %0*w10} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}*w@var{n}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date Monday of the 10th week in 1993
@w{@result{} 19930308@.}

@item
@samp{gcal %0*w10sun} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}*w@var{n}@var{www}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date Sunday of the 10th week in 1993
@w{@result{} 19930314@.}
@end itemize

@need 1000
@item The @code{@var{yyyy}@@e@r{|}t@r{|}@var{dvar}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]]}} format:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@samp{gcal %1994@@e} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}@@e})}@*
The actual date is set to the date Easter Sunday 1994
@w{@result{} 19940403@.}

@page
@item
@samp{gcal %1994@@e10}

@item
@samp{gcal %1994@@e+10} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}@@e@r{[}+@r{]}@var{n}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 10 days after Easter Sunday 1994
@w{@result{} 19940413@.}

@item
@samp{gcal %1994@@e-10} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}@@e-@var{n}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 10 days before Easter Sunday 1994
@w{@result{} 19940324@.}

@item
@samp{gcal %0@@e}

@item
@samp{gcal %00@@e}

@item
@samp{gcal %000@@e}

@item
@samp{gcal %0000@@e} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}@@e})}@*
The actual date is set to the date Easter Sunday 1993
@w{@result{} 19930411@.}

@item
@samp{gcal %0@@e10}

@item
@samp{gcal %0@@e+10} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}@@e@r{[}|@r{]}@var{n}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 10 days after Easter Sunday 1993
@w{@result{} 19930421@.}

@item
@samp{gcal %0@@e-10} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}@@e-@var{n}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 10 days before Easter Sunday 1993
@w{@result{} 19930401@.}

@item
@samp{gcal %1994@@e3Wed}

@item
@samp{gcal %1994@@e+3Wed} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}@@e@r{[}+@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 3rd Wednesday after Easter Sunday 1994
@w{@result{} 19940420@.}

@item
@samp{gcal %1994@@e-3wed} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}@@e-@var{n}@var{www}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 3rd Wednesday before Easter Sunday 1994
@w{@result{} 19940316@.}

@item
@samp{gcal %0@@e3wed}

@item
@samp{gcal %0@@e+3wed} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}@@e@r{[}+@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 3rd Wednesday after Easter Sunday 1993
@w{@result{} 19930428@.}

@item
@samp{gcal %0@@e-3we} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}@@e-@var{n}@var{www}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 3rd Wednesday before Easter Sunday 1993
@w{@result{} 19930324@.}

@item
@samp{gcal %1994@@t} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}@@t})}@*
The actual date is set to today's date in 1994
@w{@result{} 199400217@.}

@item
@samp{gcal %1994@@t10}

@item
@samp{gcal %1994@@t+10} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}@@t@r{[}+@r{]}@var{n}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 10 days after today's date in 1994
@w{@result{} 19940227@.}

@item
@samp{gcal %1994@@t-10} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}@@e-@var{n}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 10 days before today's date in 1994
@w{@result{} 19940207@.}

@need 1500
@item
@samp{gcal %0@@t}

@item
@samp{gcal %00@@t}

@item
@samp{gcal %000@@t}

@item
@samp{gcal %0000@@t} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}@@t})}@*
The actual date is set to today's date
@w{@result{} 19930217@.}

@item
@samp{gcal %0@@t10}

@item
@samp{gcal %0@@t+10} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}@@t@r{[}|@r{]}@var{n}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 10 days after today's date
@w{@result{} 19930227@.}

@item
@samp{gcal %0@@t-10} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}@@t-@var{n}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 10 days before today's date
@w{@result{} 19930207@.}

@item
@samp{gcal %1994@@t3Wed}

@item
@samp{gcal %1994@@t+3Wed} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}@@t@r{[}+@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 3rd Wednesday after today's date in 1994
@w{@result{} 19940309@.}

@item
@samp{gcal %1994@@t-3wed} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}@@t-@var{n}@var{www}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 3rd Wednesday before today's date in 1994
@w{@result{} 19940302@.}

@item
@samp{gcal %0@@t3wed}

@item
@samp{gcal %0@@t+3wed} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}@@t@r{[}+@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 3rd Wednesday after today's date
@w{@result{} 19930310@.}

@item
@samp{gcal %0@@t-3we} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}@@t-@var{n}@var{www}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 3rd Wednesday before today's date
@w{@result{} 19930127@.}

@item
@samp{gcal -v a=0303 %1994@@a} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}@@@var{dvar}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 3rd March 1994
@w{@result{} 19940303@.}

@item
@samp{gcal -v a=0303 %1994@@a10}

@item
@samp{gcal -v a=0303 %1994@@a+10} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}@@@var{dvar}@r{[}+@r{]}@var{n}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 10 days after 3rd March 1994
@w{@result{} 19940313@.}

@item
@samp{gcal -v a=0303 %1994@@a-10} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}@@@var{dvar}-@var{n}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 10 days before 3rd March 1994
@w{@result{} 19940221@.}

@item
@samp{gcal -v a=0303 %0@@a} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}@@@var{dvar}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 3rd March 1993
@w{@result{} 19930303@.}

@item
@samp{gcal -v a=0303 %0@@a10}

@item
@samp{gcal -v a=0303 %0@@a+10} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}@@@var{dvar}@r{[}+@r{]}@var{n}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 10 days after 3rd March 1993
@w{@result{} 19930313@.}

@item
@samp{gcal -v a=0303 %0@@a-10} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}@@@var{dvar}-@var{n}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 10 days before 3rd March 1993
@w{@result{} 19930221@.}

@page
@item
@samp{gcal -v a=0303 %1994@@a3wed}

@item
@samp{gcal -v a=0303 %1994@@a+3wed} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}@@@var{dvar}@r{[}+@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 3rd Wednesday after 3rd March 1994
@w{@result{} 19940323@.}

@item
@samp{gcal -v a=0303 %1994@@a-3wed} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}@@@var{dvar}-@var{n}@var{www}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 3rd Wednesday before 3rd March 1994
@w{@result{} 19940216@.}

@item
@samp{gcal -v a=0303 %0@@a3wed}

@item
@samp{gcal -v a=0303 %0@@a+3wed} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}@@@var{dvar}@r{[}+@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 3rd Wednesday after 3rd March 1993
@w{@result{} 19930324@.}

@item
@samp{gcal -v a=0303 %0@@a-3wed} @w{(@equiv{} @code{@var{yyyy}@@@var{dvar}-@var{n}@var{www}})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 3rd Wednesday before 3rd March 1993
@w{@result{} 19930210@.}
@end itemize

@item The @code{@var{month name}@r{[}@var{dd}@r{]}} format:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@samp{gcal %April} @w{(@equiv{} @var{month name})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 17th April 1993
@w{@result{} 19930417@.}

@item
@samp{gcal %april3}

@item
@samp{gcal %april03} @w{(@equiv{} @var{month name} @var{dd})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 3rd April 1993
@w{@result{} 19930403@.}
@end itemize

@need 1000
@item The @code{@var{weekday name}@r{[}@var{n}@r{]}} format:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@samp{gcal %Friday} @w{(@equiv{} @var{weekday name})}@*
The actual date is set to the date Friday of current week in February 1993
@w{@result{} 19930219@.}

@need 1000
@item
@samp{gcal %Friday2}

@item
@samp{gcal %Friday02} @w{(@equiv{} @var{weekday name} @var{n})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 2nd Friday in February 1993
@w{(@var{n} @equiv{} @samp{1@r{@dots{}}5@r{|}9})} @w{@result{} 19930212@.}
@end itemize

@item The @var{dd} format:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@samp{gcal %3}

@item
@samp{gcal %03} @w{(@equiv{} @var{dd})}@*
The actual date is set to the date 3rd February 1993
@w{@result{} 19930203@.}
@end itemize
@end table

@page
@node Commands, , Actual date modifier, Command line arguments
@subsection Commands
@cindex Commands, general view
@cindex Single commands
@cindex Commands, single
@cindex Lists of commands
@cindex Command, lists
@cindex Ranges of commands
@cindex Command, ranges
@cindex 3-Month mode commands
@cindex Special 3-Month mode commands

@menu
* Single commands::        How to use a Single command.
* 3-Month mode commands::  How to use a 3-Month mode command.
* Lists of commands::      How to use a List of commands.
* Ranges of commands::     How to use a Range of commands.
@end menu

The commands control the periods Gcal respects.  They can be partitioned
into four major classes, namely @dfn{single} commands, special
@dfn{3-Month mode} commands, @dfn{lists} of commands and @dfn{ranges} of
commands.  Single commands and special 3-Month mode commands only create
@strong{one} calendar sheet, ranges of commands or list of commands create
@strong{more than one} calendar sheet per program run.
If a list of commands is given, Gcal works sequentially on each single
command given in the list, one by one.
A range of commands is expanded first by Gcal and after expansion is done,
Gcal works sequentially on each single command produced during the internal
expansion step.

For understanding the notation used in the text below, @var{mm} is either a
number, a month name or one of the special 3-Month mode commands @option{.},
@option{..}, @option{.+} and @option{.-}@.  No lists or ranges of months or
years can be created in case a special 3-Month mode command is given.

The range of @var{mm} is valid from 1 to 12 or valid from January to
December.  Both notations may be mixed.  Month names may be abbreviated
up to their first three characters.  @var{yyyy} is a number.  The range
of @var{yyyy} is valid from 1 to 9999@.
A range @w{(@option{@var{mm}-@var{mm}}} or
@w{@option{@var{yyyy}+@var{yyyy}}} or @w{@dots{})} must consist of two
elements.  A list @w{(@option{@var{mm},@r{@dots{}},@var{mm}}} or
@w{@option{@var{yyyy};@r{@dots{}};@var{yyyy}}} or @w{@dots{})}
must contain two elements minimum and may have any number of elements.
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@cindex Command separator characters
@cindex Characters, command separator
@cindex Table of command separator characters
@cindex Command separator characters, table
@noindent
Here is a list of all ranges of commands, lists of commands and
other command separator characters:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The @samp{-} character is the @emph{range of months} separator.

@item
The @samp{,} character is the @emph{list of months} separator.

@item
The @samp{+} character is the @emph{range of years} separator.

@item
The @samp{;} character is the @emph{list of years} separator.

@item
The @samp{/} character is the @emph{month of year} separator.

@item
The @samp{:} character is the @emph{fiscal year} separator.
@end itemize
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@node Single commands, 3-Month mode commands, Commands, Commands
@subsubsection Single commands
@cindex Single Commands
@cindex Commands, single

@table @option
@item @var{NOTHING}
@arindex Command, @var{NOTHING}
@cindex Command, @option{@var{NOTHING}}
@cindex Month mode, single
@cindex Single month mode
@cindex Current month of current year
Current month of current year, called @dfn{single month mode}
in the further context.

@item @var{month name}
@arindex Command, @var{month name}
@cindex Command, @option{@var{month name}}
@cindex Selected month mode
@cindex Month mode, selected
@cindex Selected month of current year
Selected month of current year, e.g.@::

@example
@group
gcal may
gcal OCTOBER
gcal ja
@end group
@end example

@page
@item @var{yyyy}
@arindex Command, @var{yyyy}
@cindex Command, @option{@var{yyyy}}
@cindex Single year mode
@cindex Year mode, single
@cindex Selected year
Selected year, called @dfn{single year mode} in the further context, e.g.@::

@example
gcal 1992
@end example

But there is an exception of this general rule.  If the specified year number
is less or equal twelve, Gcal assumes that a selected month of the current
year is wanted.  If you want to have a selected year less or equal twelve,
call Gcal like this

@example
gcal 1:6
@end example

or like this

@example
gcal 6+6
@end example

to obtain the year @acronym{AD} 6@.

@need 1000
@item @var{mm} @var{yyyy}
@itemx @var{mm}/@var{yyyy}
@arindex Command, @var{mm} @var{yyyy}
@arindex Command, @var{mm}/@var{yyyy}
@cindex Command, @option{@var{mm} @var{yyyy}}
@cindex Command, @option{@var{mm}/@var{yyyy}}
@cindex Single month of selected year
@anchor{x-mm-yyyy}
Single month of selected year, e.g.@::

@example
@group
gcal 9 1992
gcal 9/1992
gcal Nov 1777
gcal Nov/1777
@end group
@end example

@item :
@arindex Command, :
@cindex Command, @option{:}
@cindex Single fiscal year
@cindex Fiscal year, single
@cindex Implicit fiscal year
@cindex Fiscal year, implicit
Single fiscal year, starting on the @emph{actual month} of the @emph{actual
year} and ending on month @emph{actual month}-1 of the @emph{actual year}+1,
called @dfn{implicit fiscal year} in the further context, e.g.@::

@example
gcal :
@end example

@item @var{mm}:
@arindex Command, @var{mm}:
@cindex Command, @option{@var{mm}:}
@cindex Single fiscal year
@cindex Fiscal year, single
@cindex Explicit fiscal year
@cindex Fiscal year, explicit
Single fiscal year, starting on month @var{mm} of the @emph{actual year} and
ending on month @var{mm}-1 of the @emph{actual year}+1, called @dfn{explicit
fiscal year} in the further context, e.g.@::

@example
@group
gcal 6:
gcal feb:
gcal NOVEMBER:
@end group
@end example

@need 1000
@item :@var{yyyy}
@arindex Command, :@var{yyyy}
@cindex Command, @option{:@var{yyyy}}
@cindex Single fiscal year
@cindex Fiscal year, single
@cindex Explicit fiscal year
@cindex Fiscal year, explicit
Single fiscal year, starting on the @emph{actual month} of year @var{yyyy}
and ending on month @emph{actual month}-1 of year @var{yyyy}+1, also called
@dfn{explicit fiscal year} in the further context, e.g.@::

@example
gcal :1999
@end example

@item @var{mm}:@var{yyyy}
@arindex Command, @var{mm}:@var{yyyy}
@cindex Command, @option{@var{mm}:@var{yyyy}}
@cindex Single fiscal year
@cindex Fiscal year, single
@cindex Explicit fiscal year
@cindex Fiscal year, explicit
Single fiscal year, starting on month @var{mm} of year @var{yyyy} and ending
at month @var{mm}-1 of year @var{yyyy}+1, called @dfn{explicit fiscal year}
too in the further context, e.g.@::

@example
@group
gcal 7:1999
gcal oct:1992
gcal February:1777
@end group
@end example
@end table

@need 1500
@node 3-Month mode commands, Lists of commands, Single commands, Commands
@subsubsection 3-Month mode commands
@cindex 3-Month mode commands
@cindex Special 3-Month mode commands

@table @option
@item .
@arindex Command, .
@cindex Command, @option{.}
@cindex Special 3-Month mode, @option{.}
@cindex 3-Month mode command @option{.}, special
Previous, actual and next month of the current year, e.g.@::

@example
gcal .
@end example

@need 1000
@item . @var{yyyy}
@arindex Command, . @var{yyyy}
@cindex Command, @option{. @var{yyyy}}
@cindex Special 3-Month mode, @option{. @var{yyyy}}
@cindex 3-Month mode command @option{. @var{yyyy}}, special
Previous, actual and next month of selected year, e.g.@::

@example
gcal . 1992
@end example

@need 1000
@item ..
@arindex Command, ..
@cindex Command, @option{..}
@cindex Special 3-Month mode, @option{..}
@cindex 3-Month mode command @option{..}, special
Actual quarter of the current year, e.g.@::

@example
gcal ..
@end example

@item .. @var{yyyy}
@arindex Command, .. @var{yyyy}
@cindex Command, @option{.. @var{yyyy}}
@cindex Special 3-Month mode, @option{.. @var{yyyy}}
@cindex 3-Month mode command @option{.. @var{yyyy}}, special
Actual quarter of selected year, e.g.@::

@example
gcal .. 1992
@end example

@need 1000
@item .+
@arindex Command, .+
@cindex Command, @option{.+}
@cindex Special 3-Month mode, @option{.+}
@cindex 3-Month mode command @option{.+}, special
Actual and next two months of the current year, e.g.@::

@example
gcal .+
@end example

@need 1000
@item .+ @var{yyyy}
@arindex Command, .+ @var{yyyy}
@cindex Command, @option{.+ @var{yyyy}}
@cindex Special 3-Month mode, @option{.+ @var{yyyy}}
@cindex 3-Month mode command @option{.+ @var{yyyy}}, special
Actual and next two months of selected year, e.g.@::

@example
gcal .+ 1992
@end example

@item .-
@arindex Command, .-
@cindex Command, @option{.-}
@cindex Special 3-Month mode, @option{.-}
@cindex 3-Month mode command @option{.-}, special
Actual and previous two months of the current year, e.g.@::

@example
gcal .-
@end example

@item .- @var{yyyy}
@arindex Command, .- @var{yyyy}
@cindex Command, @option{.- @var{yyyy}}
@cindex Special 3-Month mode, @option{.- @var{yyyy}}
@cindex 3-Month mode command @option{.- @var{yyyy}}, special
Actual and previous two months of selected year, e.g.@::

@example
gcal .- 1992
@end example
@end table

@node Lists of commands, Ranges of commands, 3-Month mode commands, Commands
@subsubsection Lists of commands
@cindex Commands, lists
@cindex Lists of commands

@table @option
@item @var{mm},@r{@dots{}},@var{mm}
@arindex Command, @var{mm},@r{@dots{}},@var{mm}
@cindex Command, @option{@var{mm},@r{@dots{}},@var{mm}}
@cindex List of specified months of the current year
@cindex Specified months of the current year, list
List of specified months of the current year, e.g.@::

@example
@group
gcal 1,5,12
gcal 3,1,5,3
gcal june,9,jan
@end group
@end example

@need 1500
@item @var{mm}/@var{yyyy},@r{@dots{}},@var{mm}/@var{yyyy}
@arindex Command, @var{mm}/@var{yyyy},@r{@dots{}},@var{mm}/@var{yyyy}
@cindex Command, @option{@var{mm}/@var{yyyy},@r{@dots{}},@var{mm}/@var{yyyy}}
@cindex List of months in specified year
@cindex Months in specified year, list
List of months in specified year, e.g.@::

@example
@group
gcal 1/1992,5,12/2001
gcal june/1991,9/1801,jan
@end group
@end example

@item @var{mm},@r{@dots{}},@var{mm} @var{yyyy}
@arindex Command, @var{mm},@r{@dots{}},@var{mm} @var{yyyy}
@cindex Command, @option{@var{mm},@r{@dots{}},@var{mm} @var{yyyy}}
@cindex List of specified months of selected year
@cindex Specified months of selected year, list
List of specified months of selected year, e.g.@::

@example
@group
gcal 3,7 1999
gcal 1,dec,july 1777
@end group
@end example

@item @var{yyyy};@r{@dots{}};@var{yyyy}
@arindex Command, @var{yyyy};@r{@dots{}};@var{yyyy}
@cindex Command, @option{@var{yyyy};@r{@dots{}};@var{yyyy}}
@cindex List of specified years
@cindex Specified years, list
List of specified years, e.g.@::

@example
gcal 1992;1777;1899
@end example

@item @var{mm}:@var{yyyy};@r{@dots{}};@var{mm}:@var{yyyy}
@arindex Command, @var{mm}:@var{yyyy};@r{@dots{}};@var{mm}:@var{yyyy}
@cindex Command, @option{@var{mm}:@var{yyyy};@r{@dots{}};@var{mm}:@var{yyyy}}
@cindex List of specified fiscal years
@cindex Specified fiscal years, list
@cindex List of fiscal years
@cindex Fiscal years, list
List of specified fiscal years, e.g.@::

@example
gcal 7:1999;8:1992;April:3
@end example
@end table

@need 1500
@noindent
@strong{Other valid lists:}

@table @option
@item @var{mm},@var{mm}/@var{yyyy},@r{@dots{}}
@arindex Command, @var{mm},@var{mm}/@var{yyyy},@r{@dots{}}
@cindex Command, @option{@var{mm},@var{mm}/@var{yyyy},@r{@dots{}}}
@cindex Mixed list of months
@cindex Months, mixed list
Mixed list of months consisting of: @option{@var{mm} @var{mm}/@var{yyyy}}

@example
gcal 6,8,3/1999,feb/3,january
@end example

@need 1500
@item @var{mm}:;@var{mm}:@var{yyyy};@r{@dots{}}
@arindex Command, @var{mm}:;@var{mm}:@var{yyyy};@r{@dots{}}
@cindex Command, @option{@var{mm}:;@var{mm}:@var{yyyy};@r{@dots{}}}
@cindex Mixed list of fiscal years
@cindex Fiscal years, mixed list
Mixed list of fiscal years of the given / actual year consisting of:
@option{@var{mm}: :@var{yyyy} @var{mm}:@var{yyyy} @var{yyyy}}

@example
gcal 3:;1994;february:1999;:1777;JAN:
@end example

@need 1000
@item @var{mm}:;@var{mm}:;@r{@dots{}}
@arindex Command, @var{mm}:;@var{mm}:;@r{@dots{}}
@cindex Command, @option{@var{mm}:;@var{mm}:;@r{@dots{}}}
@cindex List of fiscal years of the actual year
@cindex Fiscal years of the actual year, list
List of fiscal years of the actual year consisting of: @option{@var{mm}:}

@example
gcal 3:;august:;DEC:
@end example
@end table

@node Ranges of commands, , Lists of commands, Commands
@subsubsection Ranges of commands
@cindex Ranges of commands
@cindex Commands, ranges

@table @option
@item @var{mm}-@var{mm}
@arindex Command, @var{mm}-@var{mm}
@cindex Command, @option{@var{mm}-@var{mm}}
@cindex Range of current months
@cindex Current months, range
Range of current months, e.g.@::

@example
@group
gcal 3-7
gcal 11-8
gcal MAY-dec
gcal 12-aug
@end group
@end example

@item @var{mm}/@var{yyyy}-@var{mm}/@var{yyyy}
@arindex Command, @var{mm}/@var{yyyy}-@var{mm}/@var{yyyy}
@cindex Command, @option{@var{mm}/@var{yyyy}-@var{mm}/@var{yyyy}}
@cindex Range of months of year
@cindex Months of year, range
Range of months of year, e.g.@::

@example
@group
gcal 3/1991-july/1992
gcal dec/1994-3
gcal sep-dec/2000
@end group
@end example

@item @var{mm}-@var{mm} @var{yyyy}
@arindex Command, @var{mm}-@var{mm} @var{yyyy}
@cindex Command, @option{@var{mm}-@var{mm} @var{yyyy}}
@cindex Range of specified months of selected year
@cindex Specified months of selected year, range
Range of specified months of selected year, e.g.@::

@example
@group
gcal 3-7 1999
gcal nov-3 1777
gcal aug-dec 1992
@end group
@end example

@need 1000
@item @var{mm}-@var{mm} @var{yyyy}+@var{yyyy}
@arindex Command, @var{mm}-@var{mm} @var{yyyy}+@var{yyyy}
@cindex Command, @option{@var{mm}-@var{mm} @var{yyyy}+@var{yyyy}}
@cindex Range of specified months of selected years
@cindex Specified months of selected years, range
Range of specified months of selected years, e.g.@::

@example
@group
gcal 3-7 1999+2001
gcal nov-3 1777+1600
gcal aug-dec 1992+1994
@end group
@end example

@need 1000
@item @var{mm} @var{yyyy}-@var{yyyy}
@itemx @var{mm}/@var{yyyy}-@var{yyyy}
@arindex Command, @var{mm} @var{yyyy}-@var{yyyy}
@arindex Command, @var{mm}/@var{yyyy}-@var{yyyy}
@cindex Command, @option{@var{mm} @var{yyyy}-@var{yyyy}}
@cindex Command, @option{@var{mm}/@var{yyyy}-@var{yyyy}}
@cindex Range of specified month of selected years
@cindex Specified month of selected years, range
Range of specified month of selected years, e.g.@::

@example
@group
gcal AUGUST 1494-1497
gcal 3/1993-1999
gcal nov/3-1777
@end group
@end example

@need 1500
@item @var{yyyy}+@var{yyyy}
@arindex Command, @var{yyyy}+@var{yyyy}
@cindex Command, @option{@var{yyyy}+@var{yyyy}}
@cindex Range of specified years
@cindex Specified years, range
Range of specified years, e.g.@::

@example
gcal 1992+1994
@end example

@item @var{mm}:@var{yyyy}+@var{mm}:@var{yyyy}
@arindex Command, @var{mm}:@var{yyyy}+@var{mm}:@var{yyyy}
@cindex Command, @option{@var{mm}:@var{yyyy}+@var{mm}:@var{yyyy}}
@cindex Range of specified fiscal years
@cindex Specified fiscal years, range
@cindex Range of fiscal years
@cindex Fiscal years, range
Range of specified fiscal years, e.g.@::

@example
@group
gcal 7:1999+8:1992
gcal aug:1992+july:1999
@end group
@end example
@end table

@page
@node The GCAL environment variable, , Command line arguments, Invoking Gcal
@section The @env{GCAL} environment variable
@cindex Environment variable, @env{GCAL}
@cindex @env{GCAL} environment variable
@vindex GCAL

The environment variable @env{GCAL} can hold a set of default options for Gcal
(@pxref{x-GCAL, , Environment Variable @env{GCAL}})@.
These options are interpreted first at program start-up, and some can be
overwritten by explicit command line arguments or values found in a
@option{@@@var{file}} response file.
@xref{Command line arguments},
and
@ref{Response file},
for further information.

@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@noindent
For example:

@itemize @bullet
@item
for @strong{sh}:
@smallexample
GCAL="-i @@color -b 3"; export GCAL
@end smallexample

@item
for @strong{csh}:
@smallexample
setenv GCAL "-i @@color -b 3"
@end smallexample

@item
for @strong{MS-DOS}:
@smallexample
set GCAL=-i @@color -b 3
@end smallexample
@end itemize
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@cindex Environment variable, @env{GCAL_OPT}
@cindex @env{GCAL_OPT} environment variable
@vindex GCAL_OPT
On Vax/VMS, the name of the environment variable is @w{@env{GCAL_OPT}}, to
avoid a conflict with the symbol @env{GCAL} set for invocation of the program.

@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@noindent
For example:

@itemize @bullet
@item
for @strong{VMS}:
@smallexample
define GCAL_OPT "-i @@color -b 3"
@end smallexample
@end itemize

@node Eternal Holidays, Fixed Dates, Invoking Gcal, Top
@chapter Eternal Holidays
@cindex Eternal Holidays
@cindex Holiday list, eternal

The @emph{eternal holiday list} is created only for dates after
@acronym{AD} 29@.  It is assumed that the Gregorian Reformation has
occurred from 10th till 22nd March 1924 for all Christian-Orthodox holidays,
which are inserted into the @emph{eternal holiday list}.
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

The @emph{eternal holiday list} can be displayed in different ways:
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

If you start Gcal without an explicit (fiscal) date
and the @emph{eternal holiday list} argument
(@pxref{x-holiday-list, , Calendar option @option{--holiday-list@r{[}=long@r{|}short@r{]}}}),
e.g.@::

@example
@group
gcal -qfr --holiday-list
gcal -qfr -n
gcal -qfr -n :
@end group
@end example

@noindent
Gcal displays all holidays of the eternal holiday list that refer
to the actual / fiscal year, without a leading calendar sheet.

In case you start Gcal with the @emph{eternal holiday list} argument and a
month (plus an additional year), e.g.@::

@example
@group
gcal -qbe --holiday-list july
gcal -qbe -n july
gcal -qbe -n 7 1993
gcal -qbe -n 7/1993
@end group
@end example

@noindent
Gcal displays a month calendar sheet of the specified month (of year),
and trailing those holidays of the eternal holiday list that refer to the
given month (of the given year)@.

If you start Gcal with the @emph{eternal holiday list} argument and a
simple year (or an explicit fiscal year), e.g.@::

@example
@group
gcal -qbe --holiday-list 1993
gcal -qbe -n 1993
gcal -qbe -n july:
gcal -qbe -n :1993
gcal -qbe -n 7:1993
@end group
@end example

@noindent
Gcal displays a year calendar sheet of the specified year or fiscal year,
and trailing all holidays of the eternal holiday list that refer to the
given year or fiscal year.

In case you start Gcal with the @emph{eternal holiday list} argument
and a special 3-Month mode command
(@pxref{3-Month mode commands}),
e.g.@::

@example
@group
gcal -qbe --holiday-list .
gcal -qbe -n .
gcal -qbe -n ..
gcal -qbe -n .+
gcal -qbe -n .-
@end group
@end example

@noindent
Gcal displays the according three months by using a fixed-style year calendar
sheet, and trailing all holidays of the eternal holiday list that refer to
these months.

In case you start Gcal with the @emph{eternal holiday list} argument and
a @emph{list} or @emph{range} of commands, it produces the according series
of eternal holiday lists.
@xref{Lists of commands},
and
@ref{Ranges of commands},
for further details.
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@noindent
Some annotations:
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

@tbindex Marking characters used in eternal holiday list
@tbindex Eternal holiday list, marking characters used
The following table lists all those characters which are used for marking
an entry in the eternal holiday list, i.e.@: directly lead its date:
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

@multitable @columnfractions .18 .82
@item @strong{Character}
@tab @strong{Description}
@item @
@item @code{+}
@tab Legal holiday which is valid in the whole country.
Is automatically provided with highlighting sequences respectively marking
characters.
@item @code{#}
@tab Legal holiday which is valid in major parts of the whole country.
Is automatically provided with highlighting sequences respectively marking
characters.
@item @code{*}
@tab Legal holiday which is valid in minor parts of the whole country.
Is not provided with highlighting sequences respectively marking characters.
@item @code{-}
@tab Other holiday which serves for memorial or remarking purposes only.
Is not provided with highlighting sequences respectively marking characters.
@end multitable
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

By using the @option{--cc-holidays=@var{cc}@r{[}+@r{@dots{}]}} option, it is
possible to provide the eternal holiday list with additional country specific
holidays.  Thereafter, those country specific holidays are part of the list.
@xref{x-cc-holidays, , Calendar option @option{--cc-holidays=@var{cc}@r{[}+@r{@dots{}]}}}.
For example:

@example
--cc-holidays=be+fr
@end example

@noindent
causes the inclusion of Belgian and French holidays into the eternal holiday
list.  The inclusion of country specific holidays is not coupled to Gcal's
internationalization
(@pxref{Internationalization, , Aspects in Internationalization})@.
This means, no country specific holidays are automatically respected at
program start-up for a definite territory or country.  So it is up to the
user to decide which country specific holidays are included into the eternal
holiday list.
@xref{The GCAL environment variable, , The @env{GCAL} environment variable},
for information how Gcal can be induced to include the country specific
holidays automatically into the eternal holiday list at program start-up.
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

The free selection of the different country specific holidays can be used very
ingenious in case information of a definite territory or country is required.
Assuming a business man from Germany proposes to travel to Italy in November
and needs the information which legal holidays are celebrated there on working
days so he is able to plan his dates.  This can be determined as follows:
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

@example
gcal -f /dev/null -q IT -D r -cE nov
@end example

@node Fixed Dates, Todays Calendar, Eternal Holidays, Top
@chapter Fixed Dates
@cindex Fixed dates

@menu
* Resource file::           How to use a Resource file.
* Resource file examples::  Examples of Resource file entries.
@end menu

@cindex Resource file
This chapter describes how to use the @emph{fixed date} feature of Gcal.
Normally, the fixed dates are stored line by line in a so-called resource file
(@pxref{Resource file})@.
On request, Gcal searches any of such resource files for those fixed dates,
that are happening in the period for which a fixed date list is wanted.  If
Gcal has found any fixed dates that are happening in the requested period,
the program displays them collectively as a fixed date list.

Thus, each time you execute Gcal in simple single month mode, i.e.@: no
explicit month, year or fiscal year is given in the command line, but the
@emph{fixed date} argument, e.g.@::

@example
@group
gcal --list-of-fixed-dates
gcal -c
@end group
@end example

@noindent
it checks the resource file for dates and processes those that refer to the
actual system date (@equiv{}today)@.  Then Gcal displays all fixed dates found
in the resource file which refer to the actual day (week/month/year) of the
actual year, without a leading calendar sheet.

@noindent
Some more examples:

@example
@group
gcal --ast -ce
gcal -cw-
gcal -c-m
gcal -c-y-
gcal -qbe -jcb -c-et
gcal --zod -cey-
gcal -qfr -jc -cey
@end group
@end example
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

The fixed date list can be embraced by different other leading and trailing
output, respectively, that is also created by Gcal:
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

In case you start Gcal with the @emph{fixed date} argument and/or a month
and/or an explicit year or fiscal year; respectively with the special
3-Month mode command, e.g.@::

@example
@group
gcal -c july
gcal -qfr -ce 7 1994
gcal -c-y 7/1994
gcal -c 7:1993
gcal -c 1993
gcal -c .
gcal -c .+
@end group
@end example

@noindent
Gcal displays a (three) month / year calendar sheet of the specified
respectively actual month / year, and trailing those fixed dates found
in the resource file that refer to the given period; the intensity level
is the same as the @option{-cy} option if the period refers to a year or
fiscal year or to a three month period, respectively, is the same as the
@option{-cm} option if the period refers to a month.

@need 1500
If you start Gcal without an explicit date and the @emph{fixed date} argument
@strong{in connection with} the @emph{eternal holiday list} argument, e.g.@::

@example
@group
gcal -qbe -n -c
gcal -qbe -n -Cm
gcal -qbe -n -Cl1224
gcal -qbe -n -cl3+
gcal -qbe -n -4-
@end group
@end example

@noindent
then Gcal displays all fixed dates found in the resource file that refer to
the requested period, and after that all holidays of the eternal holiday list
that refer to the whole actual year, without a leading calendar sheet.
@xref{Eternal Holidays},
for more details how to use an @emph{eternal holiday list}@.
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@noindent
Annotation to previous examples:
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

Each time you execute Gcal in simple single year mode,
i.e.@: no explicit month, year or fiscal year is given
in the command line, but the @emph{fixed date} argument
(with optional modifiers) and the @emph{number of blocks} argument
(@pxref{x-blocks, , Calendar option @option{--blocks=@var{number}}}),
e.g.@::

@example
@group
gcal -c --blocks=3
gcal -C-em -b 3 --cc-holidays=be
gcal -c-t -b 6 -jc
@end group
@end example

@noindent
it checks the resource file for dates and processes those that refer to the
actual system date (@equiv{}today)@.  Gcal displays a leading year calendar
sheet, and all fixed dates found in the resource file that refer to the
actual day (week/month/year) of the actual year.

You can list fixed dates of past, present or future month/years, too.
This can be done on the one hand, if you use the @option{%@var{date}}
option in the way you require
(@pxref{Actual date modifier}),
and on the other hand, if a command respectively a @emph{list}
or @emph{range} of commands is used.

@noindent
For example:

@table @samp
@item gcal -qbe -c -n- 1993
Lists all fixed dates of entire 1993 in ascending order, and the eternal
holiday list of entire 1993 in descending order; the intensity level is the
same as the @option{-cy} option.

@item gcal -c- july:1993
Lists all fixed dates of fiscal year ---starting in July 1993 and ending
in June 1994--- in descending order; the intensity level is the same as the
@option{-cy} option.

@item gcal -qbe -ce july 1993
Lists all fixed dates of July 1993 inclusive all eternal holidays merged into
this list in ascending order; the intensity level is the same as the
@option{-cm} option.

@need 2000
@item gcal -qbe -c-e -n 1993+1996
Lists all fixed dates of entire 1993, 1994, 1995 and 1996 (series of years)
inclusive all eternal holidays merged into this list in descending order, and
the eternal holiday list related to all above years in ascending order; the
intensity level is the same as the @option{-cy} option.

@item gcal -cm %19920317
Lists all fixed dates of March 1992 in ascending order.

@item gcal -qbe %1994@@e -n -c
Lists all fixed dates of Easter Sunday 1994 in ascending order, and the eternal
holiday list of entire 1994 in ascending order.
@end table

@page
@node Resource file, Resource file examples, Fixed Dates, Fixed Dates
@section Resource file
@cindex .gcalrc resource file
@cindex Resource file, .gcalrc
@cindex Resource file, use
@cindex Resource file, name
@cindex Resource file, searching mechanism
@cindex Resource file, standard
@cindex Resource file, additional
@cindex Resource file, loading
@cindex File searching mechanism
@cindex Searching resource file

@menu
* Structure of resource file::    How to write a Resource file.
* Date part of a line::           How to write the Date part.
* Further date part attributes::  What are Further date part attributes?
* Text part of a line::           How to write the Text part.
* Special Texts processed::       What are @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} Special Texts?
* Comment line::                  What is a Comment line?
* Include directives::            What are Include directives.
* Date variables::                How Date variables can be used.
* Text variables::                How Text variables can be used.
@end menu

This section describes how to use a @dfn{resource file} that contains
fixed dates and appointments.  The name of the standard resource file is
@w{@file{@env{HOME}/.gcalrc}}@footnote{On @w{MS-DOS}, @w{OS/2} and some
other operating systems, the name of the @emph{standard resource file} is
@w{@file{@env{HOME}/gcalrc}} (without a leading @samp{.})@.}@.

@anchor{x-File-searching-mechanism}
@noindent
Gcal uses a special file searching mechanism:

@enumerate 1
@item
@cindex Environment variable, @env{GCALPATH}
@cindex @env{GCALPATH} environment variable
@vindex GCALPATH
The Gcal program scans the file directories which are referenced
in the environment variable @env{GCALPATH}
(@pxref{x-GCALPATH, , Environment Variable @env{GCALPATH}})
to find the standard resource file.  The @env{GCALPATH} environment variable
contains a (@samp{:}) colon-separated@footnote{On @w{MS-DOS}, @w{OS/2} and
some other operating systems, another character will be used, e.g.@: @samp{;}
on @w{MS-DOS} and @w{OS/2}@.} list of file directories.  If no such
environment variable is defined and set, Gcal omits this step.

@item
@cindex Actual file directory
@cindex File directory, actual
@cindex Directory, actual
@cindex Environment variable, @env{HOME}
@cindex @env{HOME} environment variable
@vindex HOME
If the above action fails, Gcal looks for the standard resource file in
the file directory which is referenced in the environment variable @env{HOME}@.
If no @env{HOME} environment variable is defined and set, Gcal also omits
this step.
@xref{x-HOME, , Environment Variable @env{HOME}}.

@item
@cindex Environment variable, @env{GCAL_USR_DATADIR}
@cindex @env{GCAL_USR_DATADIR} environment variable
@vindex GCAL_USR_DATADIR
If the above action fails, Gcal inspects the @emph{user data}
file directory@footnote{Normally @w{@file{@env{HOME}/share/gcal}}@.}
to find the standard resource file.  This file directory is a file directory
relative to the @env{HOME} file directory.  If an environment variable
@w{@env{GCAL_USR_DATADIR}} is set, Gcal appends the contents of
this environment variable to the contents of the @env{HOME}
environment variable, and tries to use this file directory instead
of using the burned-in default name of this file directory
(@pxref{x-GCAL_USR_DATADIR, , Environment Variable @env{GCAL_USR_DATADIR}})@.
If no @env{HOME} environment variable is defined and set,
Gcal of course also omits this step.

@item
@cindex Environment variable, @env{GCAL_SYS_DATADIR}
@cindex @env{GCAL_SYS_DATADIR} environment variable
@vindex GCAL_SYS_DATADIR
If all above actions fail, Gcal inspects the @emph{system data}
file directory@footnote{Normally @w{@file{/usr/local/share/gcal}} or
@w{@file{@var{$prefix}/share/gcal}}@.} to find the standard resource file.
This file directory is a file directory absolute to the
@w{@emph{root}/@var{$prefix}} file directory.  If an environment variable
@w{@env{GCAL_SYS_DATADIR}} is set, Gcal tries to use this file directory
instead of using the burned-in default name of this file directory
(@pxref{x-GCAL_SYS_DATADIR, , Environment Variable @env{GCAL_SYS_DATADIR}})@.
@end enumerate

If the standard resource file is not found during the steps @w{1@dots{}4} of
the file searching mechanism, no fixed date messages will be created!

@cindex Error code 118
@cindex Exit code 118
In case the @w{@option{--debug=abort}} option is given and no standard resource
file is found during the steps @w{1@dots{}4} of the file searching mechanism,
the Gcal program will be aborted with an error code.
@xref{x-118-Error-code, , Error Code 118},
and
@ref{x-debug-abort, , Global option @option{--debug=abort}},
for more information.

@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

If a @w{@option{-f@r{|}F @var{name}@r{[}+@r{@dots{}]}}} respectively
@w{@option{--resource-file=@var{name}}} command line argument is given,
a file @var{name} will be used for the resource file instead of the
standard resource file.
@xref{x-resource-file, , Fixed date option @option{--resource-file=@var{name}}}.

@need 4000
@noindent
Annotation:
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

@cindex Extended file name
@cindex File name, extended
An @dfn{extended file name} contains one ore more @samp{/} (slash)
characters@footnote{Operating systems like @w{MS-DOS} or @w{OS/2}
use the @samp{\} (Backslash) character for separating a file directory
from a file name.} and denotes a file, whose fixed access path either
starts from the root file directory, like @samp{/foo/bar/file}, or from the
actual file directory, like @samp{./bar/file} or @samp{../bar/file}@.
If @var{name} is an extended file name:
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

@itemize @bullet
@item
In case file @var{name} is found, Gcal will use it.

@item
In case file @var{name} is not found, Gcal will not use it.
@end itemize
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

@cindex Simple file name
@cindex File name, simple
A @dfn{simple file name} denotes a file, whose access-path either does not
start from the root file directory or from the actual file directory, like
@samp{file} or @samp{bar/file}@.  If @var{name} is a simple file name:
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

@itemize @bullet
@item
Gcal tries to find this file @var{name} by using the previously explained
file searching mechanism.
@end itemize

@page
@node Structure of resource file, Date part of a line, Resource file, Resource file
@subsection Structure of resource file
@cindex Structure of resource file
@cindex Resource file, structure
@cindex Resource file, two parts of a line
@cindex Separator character, whitespace
@cindex Whitespace separator character
@cindex List of whitespace character
@cindex Resource file, limitations
@cindex Limitations in a resource file

First of all, a Gcal resource file is a plain @sc{ascii} text file.
This text file may be created by any text editor or by redirecting
the @emph{standard output channel} to a file, e.g.@::

@cindex Redirection of standard output, appending to file
@example
@cartouche
$ echo '19930217 Text'>> resource-file @key{RET}
@end cartouche
@end example

A special ---but simple--- line structure is required so Gcal is able to
interpret its contents.  Each fixed date entry in a resource file must be
split into two parts, namely a @emph{date part} and an optional
@emph{text part} which @strong{must} be separated by @strong{one}
@dfn{whitespace}@footnote{For example @emph{Tab}, @emph{Space},
@emph{Form-feed} and similar characters.} character minimum.
It is unnecessary to give a whitespace separator character if no
@emph{text part} is specified.

@cindex Redirection of standard output
A line must always end with a @samp{\n} (newline) character, except it is the
last line of a resource file.  The maximum length of a line is limited to
@w{@code{INT_MAX}}@footnote{Normally, this is for example equivalent to a
value of @w{@t{32,767}} @equiv{} @w{@t{(2^15)-1}} on a @w{16-Bit} machine
architecture; to a value of @w{@t{2,147,483,648}} @equiv{} @w{@t{(2^31)-1}}
on a @w{32-Bit} machine architecture etc.} characters.  A newline character is
automatically appended to the line if the @emph{standard output channel} is
directed to a file.  A newline character is appended to the typed line in a
text editor window if it is completed by pressing the @key{RET} key.  In case
the used text editor does not generate the newline character in this way, it
should be set to this mode of operation, otherwise this text editor is useless
for creating Gcal resource files.
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@tbindex Line structure of fixed date
@tbindex Fixed date, line structure
@cindex Line structure of fixed date
@cindex Fixed date, line structure
@noindent
The line structure of fixed date entries is:

@example
@var{date part} @r{[} @emph{whitespace} @var{text part} @r{]} @emph{newline}
@end example
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@noindent
or more concrete, e.g.@::

@example
@var{yyyy}@r{[}@var{mm}@r{[}@var{dd}@r{|}@var{www}@var{n}@r{]]} @r{[} @emph{whitespace} @var{text} @r{]} @emph{newline}
@end example
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@noindent
or much more concrete, e.g.@::

@example
19940217 Hi, I'm the text!
@end example

@need 4500
@tbindex Entries in resource file
@tbindex Resource file, entries
@noindent
Besides fixed date entries, a resource file may contain further entries like:
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

@cindex Comment line in resource file
@cindex Resource file, commented line
@cindex Resource file line, commented
@cindex Remarked line in resource file
@cindex Resource file, remarked line
@cindex Resource file line, remarked
@noindent
Comments@dots{}

@example
@group
; A remarked line
;     A formatted and multi-line \
      remark
@end group
@end example
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

@cindex Include directives
@noindent
Include directives@dots{}

@example
@group
#include <@var{file name}>
#include "@var{file name}"
@end group
@end example
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

@cindex Date variables, assignments
@cindex Assignments to date variables
@cindex Date variables, operations
@cindex Operations on date variables
@noindent
Date variable assignments respectively operations@dots{}

@example
@group
@var{dvar}=@var{NOTHING}
@var{dvar}=@var{mm}@var{dd}
@var{dvar}=@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}
@var{dvar}=*d@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}
@var{dvar}=*w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}
@var{dvar}=@var{dvar}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]]}
@var{dvar}++
@var{dvar}--
@var{dvar}+=@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}
@var{dvar}-=@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}
@var{dvar}+=@var{n}@var{www}
@var{dvar}-=@var{n}@var{www}
@end group
@end example
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

@cindex Text variables, assignments
@cindex Assignments to text variables
@cindex Text variables, operations
@cindex Operations on text variables
@noindent
Text variable assignments respectively operations@dots{}

@example
@group
@var{tvar}=@r{[}@var{text}@r{]}
@var{tvar}?@r{[}@var{command}@r{]}
@var{tvar}:@r{[}@var{command}@r{]}
@var{tvar}++
@var{tvar}--
@var{tvar}+=@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}
@var{tvar}-=@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}
@end group
@end example
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

@cindex Text variables, references
@cindex References of text variables
@noindent
Text variable references@dots{}

@example
@var{tvar}
@end example
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

Text variable references at the beginning of a Gcal resource file line
may only be used if it is ensured that they are expanded to a valid Gcal
resource file line.

@page
@node Date part of a line, Further date part attributes, Structure of resource file, Resource file
@subsection Date part of a line
@cindex Date part of a resource file line
@cindex Line, date part
@cindex Resource file, date part of a line
@cindex Structure of date part
@cindex Date part, structure

The structure of a @dfn{date part} ---which gives Gcal the information
at which date a fixed date happens--- of a line in the resource file is

@noindent
@w{@strong{either}: @code{@var{yyyy}@r{[}@var{mm}@r{[}@var{dd}@r{|}@var{www}@var{n}@r{]]}}}

@quotation
@table @code
@item @var{yyyy}
(4 digits), is the year including the century (range
@w{@code{0000@r{@dots{}}9999})@.}  Leading zeroes are required
in case the defined year is less than @code{1000} and other components
of the date part are trailing the year.

@item @var{mm}
(2 digits or 3 characters), is the month (range @w{@code{00@r{@dots{}}12}} or
@code{99}, respectively @code{Jan}, @code{Feb}@dots{})@.  A given @code{99}
for the month means the last month of the year (@equiv{} December)@.  Leading
zeroes are required in case the defined month is less than @code{10} and other
components of the date part are trailing the month.

@item @var{dd}
(2 digits), is the day (range @w{@code{00@r{@dots{}}31}} or @code{99})@.
A given @code{99} for the day means the last day of the month.  Leading
zeroes are required in case the defined day is less than @code{10} and other
components of the date part are trailing the day.

@item @var{www}
(2@dots{}3 characters), is a short weekday name (range
@w{@code{Mon@r{@dots{}}Sun}})@.

@item @var{n}
(1 digit), is the @w{@var{n}'th} weekday @var{www} of month
(range @w{@code{1@r{@dots{}}5}} or @code{9})@.

@itemize @bullet
@item
@var{n} @equiv{} @w{@code{1@r{@dots{}}5}}@*
@w{@var{n}'th} weekday @var{www} of month.

@item
@var{n} @equiv{} @code{9}@*
Last weekday @var{www} of month.
@end itemize
@end table
@end quotation

@noindent
@w{@strong{or}: @code{@var{yyyy}*d@r{|}w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}}}

@quotation
@table @code
@item @var{yyyy}
(4 digits), is the year including the century (range
@w{@code{0000@r{@dots{}}9999})@.}  Leading zeroes are required
in case the defined year is less than @code{1000} and other components
of the date part are trailing the year.

@item *d
(2 characters), is the reference to an ordinary date.

@item *w
@cindex @acronym{ISO}-8601:1988 week number
@cindex Week number, @acronym{ISO}-8601:1988
@cindex Standard week number
@cindex Week number, standard
(2 characters), is either the reference to a date of an @acronym{ISO} week
or the reference to a date of a standard week.

@item @var{n}
(1@dots{}3 digits), is the value in days or in weeks, the fixed date occurs.
A given @code{99} connected with a short weekday name means the last weekday
@var{www} of the year.  A given @code{999} connected with @code{*d} means the
last day of a year, i.e.@: the 31st December.  If the computed date does not
occur in the year, i.e.@: exceeds the year bounds, the fixed date message is
suppressed.

@item @var{www}
(2@dots{}3 characters), is a short weekday name (range
@w{@code{Mon@r{@dots{}}Sun}})@.
@end table
@end quotation

@need 1000
@noindent
@w{@strong{or}: @code{@var{yyyy}@@e@r{|}t@r{|}@var{dvar}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{]}}}

@quotation
@table @code
@item @var{yyyy}
(4 digits), is the year including the century (range
@w{@code{0000@r{@dots{}}9999})@.}  Leading zeroes are required
in case the defined year is less than @code{1000} and other components
of the date part are trailing the year.

@item @@e
(2 characters), is the reference to the Easter Sunday's date.

@item @@t
(2 characters), is the reference to today's date.

@item @@@var{dvar}
(2 characters), is the reference to a date variable.

@item @r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}
(1@dots{}4 alphanumeric characters), is the optional displacement value in
days, the fixed date occurs relative to the Easter Sunday's date, relative
to today's date, or relative to a date variables date.  A given @code{-999}
means the first day of a year, i.e.@: the 1st January.  A given @code{+999}
or @code{999} means the last day of a year, i.e.@: the 31st December.  If the
computed date does not occur in the year, i.e.@: exceeds the year bounds, the
fixed date message is suppressed.
@end table
@end quotation

@noindent
@w{@strong{or}: @code{@var{yyyy}@@e@r{|}t@r{|}@var{dvar}@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}}}

@quotation
@table @code
@item @var{yyyy}
(4 digits), is the year including the century (range
@w{@code{0000@r{@dots{}}9999})@.}  Leading zeroes are required
in case the defined year is less than @code{1000} and other components
of the date part are trailing the year.

@item @@e
(2 characters), is the reference to the Easter Sunday's date.

@item @@t
(2 characters), is the reference to today's date.

@item @@@var{dvar}
(2 characters), is the reference to a date variable.

@item @r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}
(3@dots{}7 alphanumeric characters), is the optional displacement value in
weekdays, the fixed date occurs relative to the Easter Sunday's date, relative
to today's date, or relative to a date variables date.  A given @code{-99}
means the first weekday @var{www} of the year.  A given @code{+99} or @code{99}
means the last weekday @var{www} of the year.  If the computed date does not
occur in the year, i.e.@: exceeds the year bounds, the fixed date message is
suppressed.
@end table
@end quotation

@need 2000
@noindent
@strong{Please note:}

@itemize @bullet
@item
If @var{yyyy} is specified as @code{0000}, @code{000}, @code{00} or @code{0}:@*
The month and day are assumed to be annual events and the @emph{text part} will
be displayed for any year.

@item
If @var{mm} is not defined or specified as @code{00} or @code{0}:@*
The day is assumed to be a monthly event for the specified year and the
@emph{text part} will be displayed for any month.

@item
If @var{dd} is not defined or specified as @code{00} or @code{0}:@*
Each day is assumed to be a daily event for the specified year and month and
the @emph{text part} will be displayed for any day.

@item
If @var{www} is specified as a short (2@dots{}3 characters) weekday name:@*
The given weekday name is assumed to be a weekly event for the specified year
and month and the @emph{text part} will be displayed for any week.
@end itemize

@need 5000
@cindex Validity of omission values in date part
@cindex Date part, validity of omission values
@cindex Omission values in date part, validity
@noindent
@strong{Hint:}@*
Preceding table ease misleading assumption that a fixed date, which shall
be valid for any days of the year, can be defined with a date part only
consisting of a @code{0}@.  But that is only correct in that the so-defined
fixed date is respected in some few fixed date periods only
(@pxref{Coding Scheme})@.

If a fixed date is defined which shall be respected for any days of the
year, it must be designed with a @w{@code{0*d1#999}} date part.  For example,
the same is likewise valid for fixed dates which represent a weekly event, and
that shall be valid during all the year.  Instead of creating such a fixed date
with a @w{@code{000000@var{www}}} date part (that is likewise respected in some
few fixed date periods only), it should be defined with a date part like
@w{@code{0*d1@var{www}#99@var{www}.7}}@.
@xref{Ranges of days},
and
@ref{Appearance factor of days},
for further information.

@page
@node Further date part attributes, Text part of a line, Date part of a line, Resource file
@subsection Further date part attributes
@cindex Further date part attributes
@cindex Date part, further attributes

@menu
* Lists of days::              How Lists of days can be used.
* Ranges of days::             How Ranges of days can be used.
* Repetition factor of days::  How to use such a factor.
* Appearance factor of days::  How to use such a factor.
@end menu

The date part ---which is leading a fixed date text of a Gcal resource
file line--- may be provided with further attributes, that are either
specifications of lists of days or ranges of days, which provide the
information at which date a fixed date happens.  More further attributes
are the repetition factor as well as the appearance factor.

All of those date parts in a Gcal resource file line, which are
structured as follows, may generally be provided with further attributes:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@var{mm}@r{@dots{}}}}

@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}*d@r{|}w@r{@dots{}}}}

@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@@e@r{|}t@r{|}@var{dvar}@r{@dots{}}}}
@end itemize

@cindex Fiscal year, limitations
@cindex Limitations of use of fiscal years
@cindex 3-Month mode, limitations
@cindex Limitations of use of 3-Month modes
@noindent
@strong{Attention:}@*
If the date part is supplied with further attributes and the year of the fixed
date is not given in a concrete manner, i.e.@: the year @var{yyyy} is set to
zero, such kinds of fixed dates are @strong{only} computed correctly in simple
year bounds ---which means during a current year--- and not in fixed dates
shown after the current year has changed, e.g.@: in @strong{fiscal years}@.

@node Lists of days, Ranges of days, Further date part attributes , Further date part attributes
@subsubsection Lists of days
@cindex Lists of days
@cindex Date part, lists of days
@cindex @samp{,} separator character of lists of days
@cindex Separator character of lists of days, @samp{,}

A list of days is used to define recurrent fixed dates and to use only
one line in the resource file for them, instead of using several lines
in a resource file needed for defining these recurrent fixed dates separately.

A list of days is specified by a @samp{,} separator character; it must contain
two elements minimum and may have any number of elements.  A single element of
the list may not be set to a zero value and be not concrete therefore.
(This would not make any sense in this context.)

Assuming a fixed date shall always occur on the 1st and the 15th day in
every month of the year 1996, e.g.@: @samp{Tax returns}, one solution
would be on the one hand a fixed date entry in the resource file for the
1st of the month and another entry for the 15th of the month, which would
be a total of two entries in the resource file for such a fixed date.

On the other hand, this expense can be reduced to a total of only one entry
in the resource file by using a list of days, which is likewise valid for the
1st and the 15th day in every month, that is

@example
19960001,15 Tax returns
@end example

@cindex Valid date parts of lists of days
@cindex Lists of days, valid date parts
@noindent
The use of lists of days in the date part is permitted as follows:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@var{mm}@var{dd}@r{|}@var{www}@r{|}@var{www}@var{n},@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]}@var{dd}@r{|}@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]}@var{www}@r{|[}@var{mm}@r{]}@var{www}@var{n} @r{@dots{}}}}

@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}*d@r{|}w@var{n}@r{|}@var{n}@var{www},@var{n}@r{|}@var{n}@var{www} @r{@dots{}}}}

@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@@e@r{|}t@r{|}@var{dvar},@r{|[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{] @dots{}}}}
@end itemize

@need 1000
@cindex Examples to lists of days
@cindex Lists of days, examples
@noindent
Some examples to this:

@table @code
@item 000001fr3,12,99,mon,apr14,993,julfri3,08fr
In every year in January: on the 3rd Friday, on the 12th, on the last day
of the month and on every Monday.  And in every year: on the 14th April,
on the 3rd December, on the 3rd Friday in July and on every Friday in August.

@item 199600mon,fr,12
In the year 1996 in every month: on every Monday, on every Friday and on
the 12th.

@item 0*d1,1fr,999,17mo
In every year: on the first day of the year, on the 1st Friday of the year,
on the last day of the year and on the 17th Monday of the year.

@item 1996*w1fr,1,17mo,99fr
In the year 1996: on Friday of the 1st week, on Monday of the first
week, on Monday of the 17th week and on Friday of the last week.

@item 0@@a,+1,-3,5,+4fr,2fr,-10sa
In every year: on the date of the date variable @var{a}, one day after the
date of @var{a}, three days before the date of @var{a}, five days after the
date of @var{a}, four Fridays after the date of @var{a}, two Fridays after
the date of @var{a} and ten Saturdays before the date of @var{a}@.

@item 1996@@e+1,-3,5,+4fr,2fr,-10sa
In the year 1996: one day after the Easter Sunday's date, three days before
the Easter Sunday's date, five days after the Easter Sunday's date, four
Fridays after the Easter Sunday's date, two Fridays after the Easter Sunday's
date and ten Saturdays before the Easter Sunday's date.

@item 1996@@t+1,-3,5,+4fr,2fr,-10sa
In the year 1996: one day after today's date, three days before today's date,
five days after today's date, four Fridays after the today's date, two Fridays
after today's date and ten Saturdays before today's date.
@end table

@node Ranges of days, Repetition factor of days, Lists of days, Further date part attributes
@subsubsection Ranges of days
@cindex Ranges of days
@cindex Date part, ranges of days
@cindex @samp{#} separator character of ranges of days
@cindex Separator character of ranges of days, @samp{#}

A range of days just as a list of days is used to define recurrent
fixed dates and to use only one line in the resource file for them,
instead of using several lines in a resource file needed for defining
these recurrent fixed dates separately.

A range of days is specified by a @samp{#} separator character and must consist
of two elements, namely the starting day and the final day.  The starting day
and likewise the final day of the range may not be set to a zero value and be
not concrete therefore.  (This would not make any sense in this context.)

Assuming a fixed date shall always occur during the 1st and the 15th day
(inclusive) in every month of the year 1996, e.g.@: @samp{Inside work},
one solution would be on the one hand a fixed date entry in the resource
file for the 1st of the month, another one for the 2nd of the month until
the 15th of the month, which would be a total of 15 entries in the resource
file for such a fixed date@footnote{Apart from the possibility, that a list
of days can be used in such a case.}@.

On the other hand, this expense can be reduced to a total of only one entry
in the resource file by using a range of days, which is likewise valid for the
1st until the 15th day in every month, that is

@example
19960001#15 Inside work
@end example

@page
@cindex Valid date parts of ranges of days
@cindex Ranges of days, valid date parts
@noindent
The use of ranges of days in the date part is permitted as follows:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@var{mm}@var{www}#@var{www}}}

@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@var{mm}@var{dd}@r{|}@var{www}@var{n}#@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]}@var{dd}@r{|[}@var{mm}@r{]}@var{www}@var{n}}}

@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}*d@r{|}w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}#@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}}}

@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@@e@r{|}t@r{|}@var{dvar}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]]}#@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}}}
@end itemize

Preceding table shows that the starting and ending day can only be specified
by using date formats of the same type left and right the @samp{#} separator
character.  Thus, it is not explicitly possible to define a range of days
by using different types of date formats, means, fixed date entries like:

@example
1996@@e+3fr#1012 In the year 1996: every day that appears within the\
                period of the date 3 Fridays after Easter Sunday's\
                date until the 12th October.
@end example

@noindent
cannot be defined like this.  But this problem can be solved by using an
inclusive date period @code{%i@r{[}@var{date}@r{][}#@r{[}@var{date}@r{]]}}
special text for defining the ending day of the range@footnote{Implicit
solution.}, and the fixed dates are simply produced until the last day of
the year, e.g.@::

@example
1996@@e+3fr#+999 In the year 1996: every day that appears within the\
                period of the date 3 Fridays after Easter Sunday's\
                date until the 12th October.%i0#19961012
@end example

@xref{Inclusive date period, , Inclusive date period @code{%i@r{[}@var{date}@r{][}#@r{[}@var{date}@r{]]}} special text},
for more details.

@cindex Examples to ranges of days
@cindex Ranges of days, examples
@noindent
Some examples to this:

@table @code
@item 199600mon#fr
In the year 1996 in every month: every day that appears within the day
sequence @samp{mon, tue, wed, thu, fri}@.

@item 000000fr#mon
In every year in every month: every day that appears within the day
sequence @samp{fri, sat, sun, mon}@.

@item 000001fr3#12
In every year in January: every day that appears within the period
of the 3rd Friday of the month until the 12th of the month.

@item 00000112#fr3
In every year in January: every day that appears within the period
of the 12th of the month until the 3rd Friday of the month.

@item 00000112#augfri3
In every year: every day that appears within the period
of the 12th January until the 3rd Friday of August.

@item 0000sep13#99fr9
In every year: every day that appears within the period
of the 13th September until the last Friday of December.

@item 0*d1#1fr
In every year: every day that appears within the period
of the 1st day of the year until the 1rd Friday of the year.

@item 0*d99fr#333
In every year: every day that appears within the period
of the last Friday of the year until the 333rd day of the year.

@item 1996*w1fr#17mo
In the year 1996: every day that appears within the period
of the Friday of the 1st week until the Monday of the 17th week.

@item 0@@a#+4fr
In every year: every day that appears within the period
of the date of the date variable @var{a} until the 4th Friday after the
date of the date variable @var{a}@.

@item 1996@@e-3#+9fr
In the year 1996: every day that appears within the period
of the date three days before the Easter Sunday's date until the 9th Friday
after the date of the Easter Sunday's date.

@item 1996@@t-3#+99fr
In the year 1996: every day that appears within the period
of the date three days before today's date until the last Friday of
the year.
@end table

@node Repetition factor of days, Appearance factor of days, Ranges of days, Further date part attributes
@subsubsection Repetition factor of days
@cindex Repetition factor of days, @samp{:@var{n}}
@cindex @samp{:@var{n}} repetition factor of days
@cindex Date part, repetition factor of days

A repetition factor of days is used to define recurrent fixed dates
and to use only one line in the resource file for them, instead of
using several lines in a resource file needed for defining these
recurrent fixed dates separately.

A repetition factor of days (@samp{:@var{n}}) is specified by a @samp{:}
character and must trail the day field ---which must have a concrete
value in a date part of a Gcal resource file and has not been set to a zero
value--- respectively either lead or trail an appearance factor of days.
Except ranges of days or fixed dates which occur only on a definite weekday
like @samp{199600mon Every Monday 1996}, such a repetition factor may be
specified in all possible codings of date parts of a Gcal resource file.

This factor may have values in range @w{@code{1@r{@dots{}}999}@.}  Values
greater than the real difference between the date of the first occurrence of
the fixed date and the last day of the year are always reduced to this real
difference.  In this sense, any value greater @code{365}@footnote{Or
@code{366} in leap years.} means a repetition factor until the last day of
the year.

Assuming a fixed date shall always occur on the 15th day in every month of
the year 1996 and covers a period of four days (inclusive the 15th itself),
e.g.@: @samp{Co-workers training}, one solution would be on the one hand a
fixed date entry in the resource file for the 15th of the month and the
succeeding three days, which would be a total of four entries in the resource
file for such a fixed date@footnote{Apart from the possibility, that a list
or a range of days can be used in such a case.}@.

@need 2000
On the other hand, this expense can be reduced to a total of only one entry
in the resource file by using a repetition factor of days, which is likewise
valid for the 15th and the three days which succeed the 15th in every month,
namely

@example
19960015:4 Co-workers training
@end example

@cindex Valid date parts of repetition factors of days
@cindex Repetition factors of days, valid date parts
@noindent
The use of repetition factors of days in the date part is permitted as follows:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@var{mm}@var{dd}:@var{n}@r{|}@var{www}@var{n}:@var{n}}}

@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}*d@r{|}w@var{n}:@var{n}@r{|}@var{n}@var{www}:@var{n}}}

@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@@e@r{|}t@r{|}@var{dvar}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]]}:@var{n}}}

@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@var{mm}@var{dd}:@var{n}@r{|}@var{www}@var{n}:@var{n},@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]}@var{dd}:@var{n}@r{|[}@var{mm}@r{]}@var{www}@var{n}:@var{n} @r{@dots{}}}}

@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}*d@r{|}w@var{n}:@var{n}@r{|}@var{n}@var{www}:@var{n},@var{n}:@var{n}@r{|}@var{n}@var{www}:@var{n} @r{@dots{}}}}

@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@@e@r{|}t@r{|}@var{dvar}:@var{n},@r{|[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}:@var{n},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}:@var{n} @r{@dots{}}}}
@end itemize

@cindex Examples to repetition factors of days
@cindex Repetition factors of days, examples
@noindent
Some examples to this:

@table @code
@item 000001fr3:11
In every year in January: every day that appears within the period
of the 3rd Friday of the month and the succeeding ten days.

@item 00000112:3
In every year in January: every day that appears within the period
of the 12th of the month and the succeeding two days.

@item 00000112:3,fr3:5
In every year in January: every day that appears within the period
of the 12th of the month and the succeeding two days, and that
appears within the period of the 3rd Friday of the month and the
succeeding four days.

@item 0*d1:1
In every year: every day that appears within the period
of the 1st day of the year and no succeeding day.

@item 0*d1:2
In every year: every day that appears within the period
of the 1st day of the year and the succeeding day.

@item 0*d99fr:333
In every year: every day that appears within the period
of the last Friday of the year and the succeeding 332 days.
Well, in cases a fixed date exceeds the year bounds, it will only
be produced until the last day of the year.

@item 1996*w1fr:17
In the year 1996: every day that appears within the period
of the Friday of the 1st week and the succeeding 16 days.

@item 0@@a:4
In every year: every day that appears within the period
of the date of the date variable @var{a} and the succeeding three days.

@item 1996@@e-3:9
In the year 1996: every day that appears within the period
of the date three days before the Easter Sunday's date and the succeeding
eight days.

@item 1996@@t-3:9
In the year 1996: every day that appears within the period
of the date three days before today's date and the succeeding
eight days.
@end table

@node Appearance factor of days, , Repetition factor of days, Further date part attributes
@subsubsection Appearance factor of days
@cindex Appearance factor of days, @samp{.@var{n}}
@cindex @samp{.@var{n}} appearance factor of days
@cindex Date part, appearance factor of days

An appearance factor of days is used to define
a concrete displacement of recurrent fixed dates.

An appearance factor of days (@samp{.@var{n}}) is specified by a @samp{.}
character and must trail the day field ---which must have a concrete
value in a date part of a Gcal resource file and has not been set to a zero
value--- respectively either lead or trail a repetition factor of days.
Except fixed dates which occur only on a definite weekday and are not specified
by using a range of days, like @samp{199600mon Every Monday 1996}, such an
appearance factor may be specified in all possible codings of date parts
of a Gcal resource file.  This factor may be specified with each single
element of lists of days, but in a range of days, this factor may trail
@strong{only} the final day of the range.  Well, the use of such an appearance
factor is only helpful if it is either given in a range of days, or if it is
given together with a repetition factor.

This factor may have values in range @w{@code{1@r{@dots{}}999}@.}  Fixed dates
will be ignored if the factor takes values greater than the real difference
between the date of the occurrence of the fixed date and the last day of the
year, respectively the end of the period, for which the fixed dates shall
either be produced or respected.

Assuming a fixed date shall always occur on the 15th day in every month of
the year 1996 and covers a period of seven days (inclusive the 15th itself),
but shall only be respected every third day (i.e.@: two days have to be
skipped at a time) within this period, e.g.@: @samp{Training-college},
one solution would be on the one hand a fixed date entry in the resource
file for the 15th of the month, for the 18th and for the 21st of the month,
which would be a total of three entries in the resource file for such a
fixed date@footnote{Apart from the possibility, that a list of days can
be used in such a case.}@.

On the other hand, this expense can be reduced to a total of only one entry
in the resource file by using an appearance factor of days, which is likewise
valid for the 15th, the 18th and the 21st in every month, namely on the
one hand by the use of a repetition factor

@example
19960015:7.3 Training-college
@end example

@noindent
or on the other hand by the use of a range of days

@example
19960015#21.3 Training-college
@end example

@cindex Valid date parts of appearance factors of days
@cindex Appearance factors of days, valid date parts
@noindent
The use of appearance factors of days in the date part is permitted as follows:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@var{mm}@var{dd}:@var{n}.@var{n}@r{|}@var{dd}.@var{n}:@var{n}}}

@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}:@var{n}.@var{n}@r{|}@var{www}@var{n}.@var{n}:@var{n}}}

@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}*d@r{|}w@var{n}:@var{n}.@var{n}@r{|}@var{n}.@var{n}:@var{n}}}

@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}*d@r{|}w@var{n}@var{www}:@var{n}.@var{n}@r{|}@var{n}@var{www}.@var{n}:@var{n}}}

@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@@e@r{|}t@r{|}@var{dvar}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]]}:@var{n}.@var{n}}}

@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@@e@r{|}t@r{|}@var{dvar}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]]}.@var{n}:@var{n}}}

@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@var{mm}@var{dd}:@var{n}.@var{n}@r{|}@var{www}@var{n}:@var{n}.@var{n},@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]}@var{dd}:@var{n}.@var{n}@r{|[}@var{mm}@r{]}@var{www}@var{n}:@var{n}.@var{n} @r{@dots{}}}}

@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@var{mm}@var{dd}.@var{n}:@var{n}@r{|}@var{www}@var{n}.@var{n}:@var{n},@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]}@var{dd}:@var{n}.@var{n}@r{|[}@var{mm}@r{]}@var{www}@var{n}.@var{n}:@var{n} @r{@dots{}}}}

@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}*d@r{|}w@var{n}:@var{n}.@var{n}@r{|}@var{n}@var{www}:@var{n}.@var{n},@var{n}:@var{n}.@var{n}@r{|}@var{n}@var{www}:@var{n}.@var{n} @r{@dots{}}}}

@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}*d@r{|}w@var{n}.@var{n}:@var{n}@r{|}@var{n}@var{www}.@var{n}:@var{n},@var{n}.@var{n}:@var{n}@r{|}@var{n}@var{www}.@var{n}:@var{n} @r{@dots{}}}}

@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@@e@r{|}t@r{|}@var{dvar}:@var{n}.@var{n},@r{|[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}:@var{n}.@var{n},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}:@var{n}.@var{n} @r{@dots{}}}}

@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@@e@r{|}t@r{|}@var{dvar}.@var{n}:@var{n},@r{|[}+@r{|}.@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}.@var{n}:@var{n},@r{[}+@r{|}.@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}.@var{n}:@var{n} @r{@dots{}}}}

@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@var{mm}@var{www}#@var{www}.@var{n}}}

@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@var{mm}@var{dd}@r{|}@var{www}@var{n}#@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]}@var{dd}@r{|[}@var{mm}@r{]}@var{www}@var{n}.@var{n}}}

@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}*d@r{|}w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}#@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}.@var{n}}}

@item
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@@e@r{|}t@r{|}@var{dvar}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]]}#@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}.@var{n}}}
@end itemize

@cindex Examples to appearance factors of days
@cindex Appearance factors of days, examples
@noindent
Some examples to this:

@table @code
@item 000001fr3:11.3
In every year in January: every day that appears within the period
of the 3rd Friday of the month and the succeeding ten days, but only
every 3rd day within this period (skip two days at a time)@.

@item 00000112:3.2
In every year in January: every day that appears within the period
of the 12th of the month and the succeeding two days, but only
every 2nd day within this period (skip one day at a time)@.

@item 00000112:3.2,fr3:5.3
In every year in January: every day that appears within the period
of the 12th of the month and the succeeding two days, but only
every 2nd day within this period (skip one day at a time), and that
appears within the period of the 3rd Friday of the month and the
succeeding four days, but only every 3rd day within this period
(skip two days at a time)@.

@item 0*d1:10.1
In every year: every day that appears within the period
of the 1st day of the year and the succeeding nine days, and this
for any day within this period (skip zero days at a time)@.

@item 0*d1:2.5
In every year: every day that appears within the period
of the 1st day of the year and the succeeding day, but only
every 5th day within this period (skip four days at a time)@.  Well,
the succeeding days (only one in this example) of the starting day
(1st day of year) are not respected, because the next day resulted by
the appearance factor exceeds the final day (resulted by the repetition factor)
of the period.

@item 0*d99fr:333.61
In every year: every day that appears within the period
of the last Friday of the year and the succeeding 332 days, but only
every 61st day within this period (skip 60 days at a time)@.  Well, in cases
a fixed date exceeds the year bounds, it will only be produced until the last
day of the year.  No succeeding day (332 in this example) of the starting
day (last Friday of the year) is respected by reason of the displacement value
of 60 days, because the next day resulted by the appearance factor exceeds the
final day (resulted by the repetition factor) of the period (the last day of
the year)@.

@item 1996*w1fr:17.8
In the year 1996: every day that appears within the period
of the Friday of the 1st week and the succeeding 16 days, but only
every 8th day within this period (skip seven days at a time)@.

@item 0@@a:4.3
In every year: every day that appears within the period
of the date of the date variable @var{a} and the succeeding three days,
but only every 3rd day within this period (skip two days at a time)@.

@item 1996@@e-3:9.4
In the year 1996: every day that appears within the period
of the date three days before the Easter Sunday's date and the succeeding
eight days, but only every 4th day within this period (skip three days at
a time)@.

@item 1996@@e3#-20sun.15
In the year 1996: every day that appears within the period
of the date three days after the Easter Sunday's date until the 20th Sunday
before the Easter Sunday's date, but only every 15th day within this period
(skip 14 days at a time)@.

@item 1996@@t3#-20sun.15
In the year 1996: every day that appears within the period
of the date three days after today's date until the 20th Sunday before today's
date, but only every 15th day within this period (skip 14 days at a time)@.
@end table

@page
@node Text part of a line, Special Texts processed, Further date part attributes, Resource file
@subsection Text part of a line
@cindex Text part of a resource file line
@cindex Text part of a line
@cindex Text part of a line, limitations
@cindex Limitations in the text part of a line
@cindex Handling of non-printable characters in the text part
@cindex Non-printable characters in the text part, handling
@cindex Handling of special character sequences in the text part
@cindex Special character sequences in the text part, handling
@cindex Resource file, text part
@cindex Resource file, limitations
@cindex Limitations in a resource file
@cindex Line break-up character, @samp{~}
@cindex @samp{~} line break-up character
@cindex Line break-up character, @samp{^}
@cindex @samp{^} line break-up character

The @dfn{text part} of a line in a resource file can be any text you like.
Indeed, some characters have a special meaning (@samp{%}, @samp{$}, @samp{~},
@samp{^} and @samp{\}) and must be protected should the occasion arise that
special character combinations are formed with them@footnote{Like @samp{%i},
@samp{$a}@dots{}} which might be used only textually.  If the text part
contains characters that are used for highlighting the text or format it for
a printer, or characters with decimal values above 127 in the code table of the
used character set@footnote{These are potentially non-printable.} not produced
by Gcal itself, such characters respectively sequences are displayed by Gcal
in an @strong{uninterpreted} manner!  For that very reason, it can happen that
the output of such characters can potentially create problems with the used
screen device driver software and/or the external pager program, likewise
mailing of such texts by means of electronic mail.

@cindex Resource file, remarking of text part
@cindex Handling of @code{NUL} characters in the text part
@cindex @code{NUL} characters in the text part, handling
So-called @code{NUL} characters@footnote{That is the character with the value
zero in the code table of the used character set.} may also occur in the text
part, but they only cause the suppression of all succeeding characters in the
line.  In my opinion, it makes no perceptible sense to output these @code{NUL}
characters uninterpreted, so they are used for remarking purposes only;
besides, the @code{NUL} characters would lead to the same problems as already
mentioned above.

@cindex Line continuation character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} line continuation character
@cindex Resource file, line continuation
@cindex Continue line in resource file
A line of the resource file is continued on the next line if a
@w{@samp{\@r{-}\n}} @w{(backslash-newline)} character sequence is found,
e.g.@::

@need 3000
@noindent
The line:
@example
000000Mo Every Monday
@end example

@noindent
and the lines:
@example
@group
000000Mo \
Every \
Monday
@end group
@end example

@noindent
produce the same output and are essentially equivalent.

@cindex Resource file, force line break-up
@cindex Force line break-up in resource file
@cindex Resource file line, long text part
@cindex Long text part in resource file line
Furthermore, you can break-up the text of a @dfn{long text part} at any
place you like.  The term @emph{long} means in this context, that the text
displayed by Gcal would override the right text margin of the screen
respectively break-up at that margin.

@cindex Line break-up character, @samp{~}
@cindex @samp{~} line break-up character
Each time a @samp{~} (tilde) character is found in the text part, this
character is replaced by a real @samp{\n} (newline) character.  Such
texts will be displayed by Gcal in a formatted manner at a left margin,
this means, they are lead by a definite number of space characters.

@cindex Depreciation of special characters
@cindex Special characters, depreciation
@cindex Depreciation character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} depreciation character
@cindex Protection of special characters
@cindex Special characters, protection
@cindex Protection character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} protection character
You may depreciate the special meaning of the @samp{~} (tilde) character
---in case this character itself is needed--- by placing a @samp{\}
(backslash) character before it, e.g.@: @samp{\~}@.  If you need the @samp{\~}
characters themselves, you have to protect the @samp{\} (backslash) character
by another @samp{\} (backslash) character, e.g.@: @samp{\\~}@.

@cindex Line break-up character, @samp{^}
@cindex @samp{^} line break-up character
Each time a @samp{^} (caret) character is found in the text part, this
character is also replaced by a real @samp{\n} (newline) character.  Such
texts will be displayed by Gcal at column 1, this means, they are not
lead by space characters.  The rules for protecting the @samp{^} character
are the same as the rules used for protecting the @samp{~} character.

@need 3000
@noindent
The resource file @file{lbrk-1.rc}

@include examples/lbrk-1.texi

@need 3000
@noindent
is displayed as follows:

@include examples/lbrk-1a.texi

@cindex Whitespace character
@cindex Depreciation of special characters
@cindex Special characters, depreciation
@cindex Depreciation character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} depreciation character
@cindex Protection of special characters
@cindex Special characters, protection
@cindex Protection character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} protection character
Because @emph{whitespace} characters are used to separate the date part from
the text part@footnote{These are internally skipped and remain undisplayed
therefore.}, it is not possible to supply the text part with leading
@emph{whitespace} characters without further ado.  If one or more
@emph{whitespace} characters shall lead the text part, this can be arranged
by protecting the @strong{first} of these @emph{whitespace} characters (and
that by placing a @samp{\} (backslash) character before it), e.g.@: @samp{\ }
if it is a space character.  By means of such a character sequence, Gcal
notices that the text trailing the @samp{\} character is no longer used for
separating purposes, but is member of the text part.  Gcal skips this specific,
marking backslash character (avoids its output) and processes the rest of the
line as usual.

@page
The following example should be enough to elucidate the above facts.  The
resource file @file{wspc-1.rc}

@include examples/wspc-1.texi

@need 3000
@noindent
is displayed as follows:

@include examples/wspc-1a.texi

@page
@node Special Texts processed, Comment line, Text part of a line, Resource file
@subsection @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} Special Texts
@cindex @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} special texts
@cindex Special text starting character, @samp{%}
@cindex @samp{%} special text starting character
@cindex Depreciation of special characters
@cindex Special characters, depreciation
@cindex Depreciation character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} depreciation character
@cindex Protection of special characters
@cindex Special characters, protection
@cindex Protection character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} protection character
@cindex Format instruction

The text part of a resource file line may be provided with different special
texts which may occur in any@footnote{Rational!} number and order.  All these
texts start with a @samp{%} (percent) character which may be protected by a
leading @samp{\} (backslash) character if the @samp{%} (percent) character
itself is wanted to be used in the text part, e.g.@: @samp{\%}@.  The @samp{%}
character is mostly trailed by an optional format instruction, (see
@ref{Format Instruction},
for the detailed description of the format instruction and its components),
and then trailed by a distinguishing mark ---which defines the kind of the
special text to be used--- and if it is a letter, Gcal accepts
it @strong{case-sensitive}@.
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

The purpose of these special texts is mainly to suppress output of fixed
dates in definite cases, either, or to provide them with particular texts
respectively to start external commands.
@xref{Special Texts, , Description of all @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} Special Texts},
for a complete description of all usable special texts, and
@ref{Special Texts Summary, , Summary of all @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} Special Texts},
for an according short-list of them.
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@noindent
For example, the resource file @file{speci-1.rc}

@include examples/speci-1.texi

@noindent
is displayed as follows (in case today's date is the 4th October 1996):

@include examples/speci-1a.texi

@page
@node Comment line, Include directives, Special Texts processed, Resource file
@subsection Comment line
@cindex Comment line in resource file
@cindex Resource file, commented line
@cindex Resource file line, commented
@cindex Remarked line in resource file
@cindex Resource file, remarked line
@cindex Resource file line, remarked
@cindex Remark character, @samp{;}
@cindex @samp{;} remark character
@cindex Comment character, @samp{;}
@cindex @samp{;} comment character
@cindex Whitespace character

A line@footnote{Physically and logically.} beginning with a @samp{;}
(semicolon) character in the resource file is treated as a remark and
will not be used by Gcal!  Any @emph{whitespace} characters may lead
the remark character.
@xref{Text part of a line},
for information how a @code{NUL} character can be used for remarking
purposes in a text part.

The following example of the @file{remark.rc} resource file ---which
@strong{only} consists of remarks--- should be enough to elucidate
the above facts:

@include examples/remark.texi

@page
@node Include directives, Date variables, Comment line, Resource file
@subsection Include directives
@cindex Include directives
@cindex Resource file, include directives

You may add @code{#include} directives in a resource file for searching and
loading further resource files@footnote{A mechanism similar the method
which is used by the C Preprocessor.}@.  An @code{#include} directive tells
Gcal to suspend reading the current resource file and read one other resource
file before continuing.  The directive is a line in the resource file that
looks like this template:

@example
#include @emph{whitespace} @var{argument} @r{[}@emph{whitespace}@r{]} @emph{newline}
@end example

@noindent
The @var{argument} can either be

@example
"@var{file name}"
@end example

@noindent
or@footnote{Thus, a file name which is embraced by @samp{""} or @samp{<>}@.}

@example
<@var{file name}>
@end example

@cindex Separator character, whitespace
@cindex Whitespace separator character
One @emph{whitespace} character minimum is required between @code{#include}
and the @var{argument}@.  The @var{argument} may be trailed by extra
@emph{whitespace} characters and the line must always end with a @samp{\n}
(newline) character, except it is the last line of a resource file.

@noindent
Let us inspect a example which is a bit more concrete:

@enumerate 1
@item
#include "foo/bar"

@item
#include <bar>
@end enumerate

The first @code{#include} directive tells Gcal to load the file @file{bar}
in the file directory @file{foo} from the actual file directory.  If this
fails, Gcal tries to load this file by using steps @w{1@dots{}4} of the
previously explained mechanism used for searching files
(@pxref{x-File-searching-mechanism, , File searching mechanism})@.

The second @code{#include} directive tells Gcal to load the file @file{bar}
from the user respectively system data file directory by using steps
@w{3@dots{}4} of the previously explained mechanism used for searching files.
It is not allowed to include files which have a fixed access path starting
from the root file directory by such an @code{#include} directive like
@w{@samp{#include </file>}} or @w{@samp{#include </foo/bar/file>}}; just as
the specification of a single or an extended file name containing a disk/drive
specifier@footnote{Even if operating systems like @w{MS-DOS} or @w{OS/2}
permits such a disk/drive specification on principle.}, because the resulting
path name@footnote{A path name lead by the user respectively system data
file directory name.} would not be a valid file name any longer.

@cindex Error code 119
@cindex Exit code 119
Included files may include other files again.  But the nesting level of
included files is limited on the one hand by the amount of usable working
storage of the computer, and on the other hand by the value which is given
by the operating system respectively the compiler for the number of files
which can be opened simultaneously.  Recursive includes@footnote{The included
file tries to include itself again.} or cyclic includes@footnote{The included
file is included again by another file that occurs at a deeper place in such
a chain.} are not permitted, because such backward references would produce an
infinite loop in the program internally!  Gcal recognizes such situations and
terminates immediately with a fatal error.
@xref{x-119-Error-code, , Error Code 119},
for more information.

If an included resource file cannot be found and no @option{--debug=abort}
option is given, processing of the resource file containing the
@code{#include} continues.

@page
@node Date variables, Text variables, Include directives, Resource file
@subsection Date variables
@cindex Date variables
@cindex Local date variables
@cindex Date variables, global
@cindex Date variables, local
@cindex Definition of local date variables
@cindex Local date variables, definition
@cindex Definition of date variables
@cindex Date variables, definition
@cindex Management of date variables
@cindex Date variables, management
@cindex Assignments to date variables
@cindex Date variables, assignments
@cindex Resource file, limitations
@cindex Limitations in a resource file
@cindex Date variables, total number
@cindex Total number of date variables

Gcal respects @emph{global} and/or @emph{local} date variables which may
be used either in the date part of a Gcal resource file line, or which may
be part of a special text in the text part of a Gcal resource file line.
This means, up to @strong{24} user-defined date variables can be set
and referenced during program execution.
@xref{x-date-variable, , Fixed date option @option{--date-variable=@var{argument}}},
for more information how global date variables can be used.

A date variable name @var{dvar} consists of a single, case-insensitive
letter@footnote{Except the date variable @var{e} which is internally
reserved for the Easter Sunday's date, so it cannot be assigned or operated
therefore.  And except the date variable @var{t} which is internally
reserved for today's date, so it likewise cannot be assigned or operated.}@.
In a definition, this name is trailed by the assignment operator character
@samp{=}, and the numerical values of month @var{mm} (or a short, three
characters month name, e.g.@: @samp{Jan}, @samp{Feb}@dots{}) and day
@var{dd}, this variable has to store@footnote{Or the name of another
date variable, which is already defined.}, e.g.@::

@example
@group
a=1127
c=a
@end group
@end example

@noindent
stores the 27th November into the local date variable @var{a} and into the
local date variable @var{c}@.  You should always remember that date variables
can only be referenced in a line if they are already defined, because Gcal
processes a resource file line by line.
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

Only local date variables can store dynamical dates given in the
@w{@code{@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}}},
@w{@code{@var{dvar}@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}}} or
@w{@code{*d@r{|}w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}}} format, e.g.@::

@example
@group
a=03su2
b=JunMon9
c=b-3
d=c+4Sa
x=*d10
y=*d10fri
z=*w3Su
@end group
@end example

@noindent
which means, date variable @var{a} stores the date of second Sunday in March
and @var{b} stores date of last Monday in June.  The date variable @var{c}
stores the date which is three days before the date of the last Monday in
June and this date is set in the date variable @var{d} to that date which
is four Saturdays after the date of @var{c}@.  The date variable @var{x}
stores the date of the 10th absolute day of the year (@equiv{} 10th January)@.
@var{y} stores the date of the 10th Friday of the year, and the assignment to
@var{z} is the date of the Sunday which occurs in the 3rd week of the year.

@cindex Fiscal year, limitations
@cindex Limitations of use of fiscal years
@cindex 3-Month mode, limitations
@cindex Limitations of use of 3-Month modes
@noindent
@strong{Caution:}@*
These kinds of assignments to date variables are @strong{only} computed
correctly in simple year bounds ---which means during a current year---
and not in fixed dates shown after the current year has changed,
e.g.@: in @strong{fiscal years}@.

@need 1000
@cindex Visibility of date variables
@cindex Date variables, visibility
@cindex Name space of date variables
@cindex Date variables, name space
@cindex Error code 113
@cindex Exit code 113
Date variables which are defined in a resource file are always local and
only respected in this specific file, and that file which is included
by it.  This means for the included file, that @strong{all} local variables
of the caller are visible.  The included file itself may define its own
local variables in its own name-space, which are not exported to caller
on return.  All other definitions of date variables@footnote{In the command
line, environment variable @env{GCAL} or response file.} are always global.
If a resource file line contains a reference to a date variable which is not
locally defined in that file, Gcal will try to use the global values held by
this variable.  If this fails because no global definition of this date
variable is given, Gcal will not process this line.  If the simple
@option{--debug} respectively @w{@option{--debug=internal}} option is given,
informational messages for each undefined date variable will be shown on
the @emph{standard error channel}
(@pxref{x-debug-internal, , Global option @option{--debug=internal}})@.
If the @w{@option{--debug=abort}} option is given, the Gcal program will be
aborted with an error code when the first undefined global date variable
reference occurs.
@xref{x-113-Error-code, , Error Code 113},
and
@ref{x-debug-abort, , Global option @option{--debug=abort}},
for further information.

@cindex Deletion of local date variables
@cindex Local date variables, deletion
A local date variable can be deleted.  This means, that this date variable
is no longer valid in its local scope and be undefined therefore.  So it
is possible to use its potentially defined global value in succeeding lines
if this date variable is referenced there.  The following example of the
resource file @file{dvar-1.rc} elucidates these facts:

@include examples/dvar-1.texi

@noindent
So Gcal creates the following output:

@include examples/dvar-1a.texi

@need 4000
@arindex --export-date-variables
@cindex Date variables, export of local
@cindex Export of local date variables
@cindex Visibility of local date variables
@cindex Date variables, visibility of local
Only advanced users should apply the @option{--export-date-variables} option
which causes that the actual incarnation of a local date variable ---which was
previously defined in a resource file and not in an included file--- is being
exported to further resource files instead of using its global value, in case
that date variable is not locally defined in that further resource file.
@xref{Include directives},
for more details.

But be aware, the use of this option could create unwanted results, because
the order of processing the resource files is an important entity in managing
the @option{--export-date-variables} option, so it is not recommended to use
it.  You, the user, must exactly know what you are doing when applying this
option; @strong{you are expressively warned now!}
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@tbindex Operations on date variables
@tbindex Date variables, operations
@cindex Operations on date variables
@cindex Date variables, operations
@noindent
Some basic operations can be performed on date variables.  These are:
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

@multitable @columnfractions .2 .8
@item @strong{Operation}
@tab @strong{Description}
@item @
@item @code{@var{dvar}++}
@cindex Date variables, simple increment
@cindex Simple increment of date variables
@tab Simple increment by one day.
@item @code{@var{dvar}--}
@cindex Date variables, simple decrement
@cindex Simple decrement of date variables
@tab Simple decrement by one day.
@item @code{@var{dvar}+=@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}}
@cindex Date variables, addition by days
@cindex Addition by days of date variables
@tab Addition of a constant numerical day factor @w{@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}}@.
@item @code{@var{dvar}-=@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}}
@cindex Date variables, subtraction by days
@cindex Subtraction by days of date variables
@tab Subtraction of a constant numerical day factor @w{@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}}@.
@item @code{@var{dvar}+=@var{n}@var{www}}
@cindex Date variables, addition by weekdays
@cindex Addition by weekdays of date variables
@tab Addition of @var{n} weekdays @var{www}@.
@item @code{@var{dvar}-=@var{n}@var{www}}
@cindex Date variables, subtraction by weekdays
@cindex Subtraction by weekdays of date variables
@tab Subtraction of @var{n} weekdays @var{www}@.
@end multitable
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@cindex Scope of date variables
@cindex Date variables, scope
The scope of the operations which are done on a local date variable, is
that resource or include file, where the local date variable is defined.

If operations on a global date variable are performed in a resource file
or that file which is included by it, these operations are only valid in
that specific file@footnote{They are only done locally.}, not in further
resource files processed.  This means, the initial values of global date
variables are always restored if the resource file changes.

Please finally note, that each date variable assignment/operation
must be given separately on a single line in the resource file.

@page
@node Text variables, , Date variables, Resource file
@subsection Text variables
@cindex Text variables
@cindex Local text variables
@cindex Text variables, global
@cindex Text variables, local
@cindex Definition of local text variables
@cindex Local text variables, definition
@cindex Definition of text variables
@cindex Text variables, definition
@cindex Management of text variables
@cindex Text variables, management
@cindex Assignments to text variables
@cindex Text variables, assignments
@cindex Text variables, total number
@cindex Total number of text variables

Gcal respects @emph{global} and/or @emph{local} text variables which may
be used anywhere in a line of a Gcal resource file.  This means, up to
@strong{26} user-defined text variables can be set and referenced during
program execution.
@xref{x-text-variable, , Fixed date option @option{--text-variable=@var{argument}}},
for more information how global text variables can be used.

@noindent
A text variable name @var{tvar} consists of the @samp{$} prefix and a single,
case-insensitive letter.

@noindent
A text variable is defined as follows:

@itemize @bullet
@item
If the name of a text variable is trailed by the assignment operator
character @samp{=}, all the text which appears at the right side of
this assignment operator is assigned to this text variable.

@item
If the name of a text variable is trailed by the assignment operator
character @samp{?}, all the text which appears at the right side of this
assignment operator is assumed as an external command and executed by Gcal.
The output which is created on the @emph{standard output channel} by the
command run is assigned to this text variable; and that in an interpreted
manner.  This means, Gcal interprets all special texts and references
to other text variables that are contained in this output.
@xref{Special Texts processed},
for further information.

@item
If the name of a text variable is trailed by the assignment operator
character @samp{:}, all the text which appears at the right side of this
assignment operator is assumed as an external command and executed by Gcal.
The output which is created on the @emph{standard output channel} by the
command run is assigned to this text variable; and that in an uninterpreted
manner.  This means, Gcal does not interpret any special texts and references
to other text variables that are contained in this output.  See also
@ref{Special Texts processed},
for further details.
@end itemize

@cindex Execute command
@cindex Command execution
Indeed, Gcal executes external commands only if the @option{--execute-command}
option is given at program start-up.
@xref{x-execute-command, , Fixed date option @option{--execute-command}},
for more details.

The text which appears at the right side of one of the valid assignment
operator characters may reference names of already defined text variables.
These references are converted to the according textual values just before
the assignment is performed by Gcal.  You should always remember that text
variables can only be referenced in a line if they are already defined,
because Gcal processes a resource file line by line.  Gcal always expands
text variable references recursively until all sub-references to other
text variables are resolved.

@cindex Empty local text variables
@cindex Local text variables, empty
Local text variables are set to an @emph{empty value} and thus defined in
a special mode in case no text appears at the right side of one of the
valid assignment operator characters.

@cindex Format instruction
If a text variable is referenced, an optional format instruction may be
specified between the @samp{$} prefix and the single letter (here: the
variable name), which makes it possible to modify the representation of
the text (here: the contents) at which the text variable points to.  Let
us assume a resource file by the name of @file{tvarf-1.rc} exists with
the following contents:

@include examples/tvarf-1.texi

@noindent
So Gcal creates the following output:

@include examples/tvarf-1a.texi

@xref{Format Instruction},
for the detailed description of the format instruction and its components.

@cindex Depreciation of special characters
@cindex Special characters, depreciation
@cindex Depreciation character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} depreciation character
@cindex Protection of special characters
@cindex Special characters, protection
@cindex Protection character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} protection character
You may depreciate the special meaning of the @samp{$} prefix character
---in case this character itself is needed in the text--- by placing a
@samp{\} (backslash) character before it, e.g.@: @samp{\$}@.  If you need
the @samp{\$} characters themselves in the text, you have to protect the
@samp{\} (backslash) character by another @samp{\} (backslash) character,
e.g.@: @samp{\\$}@.

@cindex Shell
@cindex Command line interpreter
External commands are not directly executed by Gcal, they are executed
by means of the command line interpreter of the operating system, the shell.
As consequence to this, of course the commands have to be specified according
to the syntax conventions of the used shell, concerning the grouping
conventions, list processing conventions, redirection conventions et cetera!
For example, it is possible that you have to write @w{@samp{$a?(cat text)}}
instead of the simple @w{@samp{$a?cat text}}@.  See the pertinent literature
for more details.

If the output of external commands, which appears on the @emph{standard
output channel}, is assigned to text variables in an interpreted manner,
this output is internally directed by Gcal into a temporary file.  Thereafter,
the contents of the temporary file is transfered to the text variable and the
temporary file is removed.

@cindex Environment variable, @env{TXT2GCALPROG}
@cindex @env{TXT2GCALPROG} environment variable
@vindex TXT2GCALPROG
If the output of external commands, which appears on the @emph{standard
output channel}, is assigned to text variables in an uninterpreted manner,
this output is internally processed by the Txt2gcal program first
(@pxref{Invoking txt2gcal, , Invoking @command{txt2gcal}}),
and then this output is directed by Gcal into a temporary file.  Thereafter,
the contents of the temporary file is transfered to the text variable and the
temporary file is removed.  In case a @env{TXT2GCALPROG} environment variable
(@pxref{x-TXT2GCALPROG, , Environment Variable @env{TXT2GCALPROG}})
is defined and set with the file name of the executable Txt2gcal program,
Gcal will use this file name for calling Txt2gcal.  Otherwise, the file name
@code{txt2gcal} ---which is burned-in during the compilation step of the
Gcal program--- is used for calling the Txt2gcal program.
The @env{TXT2GCALPROG} environment variable must always be set if the
Txt2gcal program is installed under another name than the standard name
@command{txt2gcal}, otherwise Gcal is unable to execute the Txt2gcal
program automatically!

If the simple @option{--debug} respectively @w{@option{--debug=internal}}
option is given at program start-up, informational messages about
the executed command and its @emph{exit code} will be shown on the
@emph{standard error channel}
(@pxref{x-debug-internal, , Global option @option{--debug=internal}})@.

@cindex Error code 2
@cindex Exit code 2
If the @w{@option{--debug=abort}} option is given, the Gcal program will be
aborted with an error code in case an @emph{exit code} not equal zero occurred
during the execution of the command.
@xref{x-2-Error-code, , Error Code 2},
and
@ref{x-debug-abort, , Global option @option{--debug=abort}},
for further information.

Here is an example which explains how the output of external commands can
be assigned to text variables.  Supposing there is a resource file by the
name of @file{tvarc-1.rc} with the following contents:

@include examples/tvarc-1.texi

@noindent
This file is used in the resource file @file{tvarc-1a.rc} and processed
by Gcal as follows:

@include examples/tvarc-1a.texi

@need 1000
Here are some more examples showing how Gcal processes text variables.
Let us assume a resource file by the name of @file{tvar-1.rc} exists with
the following contents:

@include examples/tvar-1.texi

@noindent
So Gcal creates the following output:

@include examples/tvar-1a.texi

@need 1000
@noindent
Or a resource file by the name of @file{tvar-2.rc} exists with the
following contents:

@include examples/tvar-2.texi

@noindent
So Gcal creates the following output:

@include examples/tvar-2a.texi

As seen before, it is allowed to store complete (or partial) date parts
(@pxref{Date part of a line}),
likewise special texts
(@pxref{Special Texts processed, , @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} Special Texts})
into text variables or references to other text variables,
which are processed by Gcal after their expansion.
@xref{Special Texts, , Description of all @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} Special Texts},
for limitations concerning the assignment of special texts to text variables.

@cindex Visibility of text variables
@cindex Text variables, visibility
@cindex Name space of text variables
@cindex Text variables, name space
@cindex Empty local text variables
@cindex Local text variables, empty
Text variables which are defined in a resource file are always local and
only respected in this specific file, and that file which is included
by it.  This means for the included file, that @strong{all} local variables
of the caller are visible.  The included file itself may define its own
local variables in its own name-space, which are not exported to caller
on return.  All other definitions of text variables@footnote{In the command
line, environment variable @env{GCAL} or response file.} are always global.
If a resource file line contains a reference to a text variable which is not
locally defined in that file, Gcal will try to use the global values held
by this variable.  If this fails because no global definition of this text
variable is given, Gcal keeps the name of this text variable untouched
in this line, except this text variable held an @emph{empty value}@.
In such a case, Gcal completely ignores this text variable while processing
and displaying instead of keeping its name untouched in this line.

An example to this.  Supposing a resource file by the name of
@file{tvar-3.rc} exists with the following contents:

@include examples/tvar-3.texi

@noindent
So Gcal creates the following output:

@include examples/tvar-3a.texi

@arindex --export-text-variables
@cindex Text variables, export of local
@cindex Export of local text variables
@cindex Visibility of local text variables
@cindex Text variables, visibility of local
Only advanced users should apply the @option{--export-text-variables} option
which causes that the actual incarnation of a local text variable ---which
was previously defined in a resource file and not in an included file--- is
being exported to further resource files instead of using its global value, in
case that text variable is not locally defined in that further resource file.
@xref{Include directives},
for more details.

But be aware, the use of this option could create unwanted results, because
the order of processing the resource files is an important entity in managing
the @option{--export-text-variables} option, so it is not recommended to use
it.  You, the user, must exactly know what you are doing when applying this
option; @strong{you are expressively warned now!}
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

@tbindex Operations on text variables
@tbindex Text variables, operations
@cindex Operations on text variables
@cindex Text variables, operations
@cindex Text variables, numerical
@cindex Numerical text variables
@noindent
Some basic operations can be performed on text variables
in case they contain integer values.  These are:
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

@multitable @columnfractions .2 .8
@item @strong{Operation}
@tab @strong{Description}
@item @
@item @code{@var{tvar}++}
@cindex Text variables, simple increment
@cindex Simple increment of text variables
@tab Simple increment by one.
@item @code{@var{tvar}--}
@cindex Text variables, simple decrement
@cindex Simple decrement of text variables
@tab Simple decrement by one.
@item @code{@var{tvar}+=@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}}
@cindex Text variables, addition
@cindex Addition of text variables
@tab Addition of a constant numerical factor @w{@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}}@.
@item @code{@var{tvar}-=@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}}
@cindex Text variables, subtraction
@cindex Subtraction of text variables
@tab Subtraction of a constant numerical factor @w{@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}}@.
@end multitable
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

Here is an example showing how Gcal processes text variable operations.
Let us assume a resource file by the name of @file{tvaro-1.rc} exists with
the following contents:

@include examples/tvaro-1.texi

@need 500
@noindent
So Gcal creates the following output:

@include examples/tvaro-1a.texi

@cindex Length preserving behavior of numerical text variables
@cindex Numerical text variables, length preserving behavior
@noindent
As you can see in the former example, if operations are made like these,
the default behavior of Gcal is to fill with leading zeroes to preserve
a former length of a text variable, in case a carry into one of the next
decimal places has happened and is taken back by an operation at a later
place in the resource file.  But this default behavior can be disabled
respectively changed by using the already above mentioned format instruction.

@cindex Scope of text variables
@cindex Text variables, scope
The scope of the definitions which are done on a local text variable, is
that resource or include file, where the local text variable is defined.

If a global text variable is redefined in a resource file or that file
which is included by it, these redefinitions are only valid in that
specific file@footnote{They are only done locally.}, not in further
resource files processed.  This means, the initial values of global
text variables are always restored if the resource file changes.

Please finally note, that each text variable assignment/operation
must be given separately on a single line in the resource file.

@page
@node Resource file examples, , Resource file, Fixed Dates
@section Resource file examples
@cindex Resource file examples
@cindex Examples of resource files

Here are some examples of problem oriented resource files which might be
useful to get a deeper impression about the attributes of Gcal's fixed date
feature.
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

Let us begin with a common example, the resource file @file{common.rc}:
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

@include examples/common.texi

@page
And here is a resource file by the name of @file{demo-1.rc}, used to detect
all Fridays the 13th of a year:

@include examples/demo-1.texi

@page
@noindent
The result for the years 1996@dots{}2002 is as follows:

@include examples/demo-1a.texi

Or a bit shorter version of the resource file @file{demo-1.rc} by the name of
@file{demo-2.rc}, likewise used to detect all Fridays the 13th of a year, and
that by using the fact, that a Friday the 13th only occurs if the first day
of a month is a Sunday:

@include examples/demo-2.texi

@page
@noindent
The result for the years 1996@dots{}2002 is as follows:

@include examples/demo-2a.texi

@noindent
Of course, preceding textual expense for the purpose of detecting all Fridays
the 13th of a year can be dramatically reduced by simply using of

@example
0*d1fri#99fri.7 Friday the 13th%i00000013#00000013
@end example

@noindent
in the resource file @file{demo-1.rc}, respectively,

@example
0*d1sun#99sun.7 %n+12 is a Friday%i00000001#00000001
@end example

@noindent
in the @file{demo-2.rc} resource file.
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@noindent
On the one hand, preceding @emph{one-liners} reduce the coding expense quite
considerably ---from 28 respectively 15 lines to 1 line in each case---, but
on the other hand, this partly increases the checking expense of these
@emph{one-liners} considerably and result in a longer program run-time
therefore.  Both @emph{one-liners} produce about 52 internal productions
respectively effective fixed date entries of themselves for each year checked
by Gcal, at which the @file{demo-1.rc} and @file{demo-2.rc} resource files
cause 24 respectively 12 effective fixed date entries only.
@page
And here is a resource file by the name of @file{demo-3.rc}, used to detect
all working-days of any month:

@include examples/demo-3.texi

@noindent
Respectively a bit shorter version of the resource file @file{demo-3.rc}:

@example
@group
; demo-3.rc
;
$a=%VWork day
$c=%i#0000$b99
0000$bmon1:5 $a
0000$btue1:4 $a
0000$bwed1:3 $a
0000$bthu1:2 $a
0000$bfri1:1 $a
0000$bmon2:5 $a
0000$bmon3:5 $a
0000$bmon4:5 $a$c
0000$bmon9:5 $a$c
@end group
@end example

@page
@noindent
And a resource file by the name of @file{include.rc} exists which
is only used to include one given resource file:

@include examples/include.texi

@noindent
Then the result for the month August 1996 is as follows:

@include examples/demo-3a.texi

@noindent
And of course, the preceding textual expense for the purpose of detecting
all work days of any month can be dramatically reduced by simply using of

@example
00000001#0099 %V%rWork day
@end example

@noindent
in the resource file @file{demo-3.rc}.

@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

And next the resource file by the name of @file{sun-1.rc} which detects
the actual local time, the approximate time of sunrise and sunset, day
and night length of two geographic locations:

@page
@include examples/sun-1.texi

@page
@noindent
The result for the 12th September 1999 is as follows:

@include examples/sun-1a.texi

@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

The next example is the resource file @file{redir-1.rc} which demonstrates
the use of the shell command @code{%!@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text:

@include examples/redir-1.texi

@noindent
The result of succeeding call of Gcal, to which you can also add the
@option{--debug=all} option for a better understanding of the execution
methods, is as follows:

@include examples/redir-1a.texi

@page
And finally a resource file by the name of @file{swtim-1.rc} which produces
fixed date messages reminding Daylight Saving that are valid since 1981 for
the Federal Republic of Germany@footnote{Two days before adaptation till
two days after adaptation.}@.

@include examples/swtim-1.texi

@noindent
The result for the year 1998 is as follows:

@include examples/swtim-1a.texi

@node Todays Calendar, Gcal Utilities, Fixed Dates, Top
@appendix Genesis of the Gregorian Calendar
@cindex Gregorian calendar, genesis
@cindex Calendar, Gregorian
@cindex Calendar, Julian
@cindex Julian calendar

The nowadays calendar was first formulated in several inaccurate variations by
the Romans based on methods developed by the Babylonians and Egyptians.  The aim
of all these calendars was to harmonize the cycles of the Moon and the Sun.
During Julius Caesar's reign, January was falling in autumn so he ordered
@w{Sosigenes} to make changes to the calendar.  He added 90 days to the year
46 @acronym{BC} to make up for the seasonal drift and adjusted the lengths of
the months similarly as we know them to be today.  He introduced the leap year
by adding one day to February every four years.  For the present, the leap year
regulation was made in the way that all four years after the 23rd day in
February a leap day was laid in, so the 24th February occurred twice.
The use of the leap year was an improvement but not entirely accurate.

But in the later years, the leap rule was used in the wrong way so that the
errors are corrected by emperor Augustus in the year 8 @acronym{BC}@.  A
curious sequel happened on this occasion.  Because Augustus reacted with great
jealousy to all things previously made and propagated by Julius Caesar, he did
not like Caesar's name in the calendar, namely the today's month of
@strong{July}@.  Offhandedly he ordered to name another month to himself
and so the month name @strong{August} arose.  Furthermore, Augustus did not
tolerate the fact that his month of birth (the August) was shorter than
Caesar's month in the sense of the periodical sequence of months with 30
and 31 days.  Consequently, the month of August got 31 days, too.  Due to
this modification, the number of days in February were reduced to 28 and 29
days, respectively, so the 29th February was designed to be the leap day now.

This calendar is well known under the term @dfn{Julian calendar} and is
based on a plain solar year.  The nominal length of a solar year (respectively
a so-called tropical year) is 365 days, 5 hours, 48 minutes, and 46 seconds.
One 366-day year every four years equates to an average Julian year of 365
days and 6 hours, consequently to 365.25 days.  This means, every four years,
an error of 44 minutes, 56 seconds was accumulated by this kind of calendar
calculation.  Because of this counting method, the length of the years becomes
a bit too long, by more than 11 minutes.

By the 16th century, the vernal equinox occurred around March 11, rather
than March 21, by reason of an accumulated error of ten days.  The feast of
Easter shifted away more and more from the habitual vernal date, which must
have always been celebrated on an earlier date.  So Pope Gregory XIII
introduced the new style calendar in 1582@.  Thursday, the 4th October 1582,
was followed by Friday, the 15th October, by suppressing the ten days between
both dates.  Moreover, he ordained that years ending in hundreds should not be
leap years unless they are divisible by 400@.  Incidentally, the Gregorian
reform compensates by 72 hours (3 days) every 400 years.  The actual excess
accumulated is 74 hours, 53 minutes and 20 seconds.  The error of 2 hours, 53
minutes and 20 seconds every 400 years accumulates to one day in about 3300
years.  Thereby, the Gregorian year has an average length of 365.2425 days.

But this @dfn{Gregorian calendar} was accepted very slowly by others.  Catholic
countries adopted the Gregorian calendar almost immediately.  Most Protestant
countries on the Continent adopted the new calendar around 1700@.  England and
the American colonies changed in 1752, by act of Parliament.  Orthodox
Christian countries adopted the Gregorian calendar later.  Russia was the
last European country to do so, after the communist revolution of 1917@.
As a result, the former @w{U.S.S.R.@:} celebrated the October Revolution
(happened on October 25th, 1917) in the old style calendar on November 7th.

The era of a world wide uniform calendar is already part of history today.
The Iran returned to the traditional Mohammedan lunar calendar in 1979 after
removal of the Shah reign.  There are some efforts to improve our currently
valid Gregorian calendar.  Its disadvantages are the reason why an appointed
day is not always on the same week day.  Besides, the month lengths are not
equal and the holidays, which have relations to the feast of Easter, are moved
within the calendar from one year to another.  A very sophisticated suggestion
was proposed by the United Nations, but the international establishment of
this suggestions has failed, since it was resisted by some countries as well
as the churches.

@node Gcal Utilities, Internationalization, Todays Calendar, Top
@appendix Gcal Utilities
@cindex Gcal Utilities
@cindex Utilities for Gcal

@menu
* Invoking tcal::      How to run @command{tcal} and a summary of its options.
* Invoking txt2gcal::  How to run @command{txt2gcal} and a summary of its options.
* Invoking gcal2txt::  How to run @command{gcal2txt} and a summary of its options.
@end menu

Three small utility programs are part of the Gcal @value{GCAL-VERSION} package.
The Tcal program runs the Gcal program with the date set one day ahead.
The Txt2gcal program creates a verbatim Gcal resource file from a text file,
and in contrast to this, the Gcal2txt program creates a verbatim text file
from a Gcal resource file.

@node Invoking tcal, Invoking txt2gcal, Gcal Utilities, Gcal Utilities
@appendixsec Invoking @command{tcal}
@cindex Command line options, @command{tcal}
@cindex Invoking @command{tcal}
@cindex The @command{tcal} utility
@cindex Utility @command{tcal}
@cindex @command{tcal}, utility
@cindex Options of @command{tcal}
@cindex @command{tcal}, options

The Tcal program runs the Gcal program with the date of tomorrow's
day@footnote{This is equivalent the @w{@option{--shift=1}} option.}@.
Its arguments are as follows:

@example
tcal @r{[}--help @r{|} --version@r{] | [}--shift=@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{number}@r{] [}@var{argument}@r{@dots{}]}
@end example

@noindent
All given @var{arguments} are passed unmodified to the Gcal program.
If the Gcal program shall be called with another date than tomorrow's
date, this desired date can be selected by using the
@w{@option{--shift=@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{number}}} option, in
which @w{@option{@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{number}}} is the distance of days
the desired date is distant from the actual system date (@equiv{}today)@.
(Works only for Gregorian years.)  The @option{--shift} option must be
given before all other @var{arguments} that are passed to the Gcal program.

@cindex @env{GCALPROG} environment variable
@cindex Environment variable, @env{GCALPROG}
@vindex GCALPROG
In case a @env{GCALPROG} environment variable
(@pxref{x-GCALPROG, , Environment Variable @env{GCALPROG}})
is defined and set with the file name of the executable Gcal program,
Tcal will use this file name for calling Gcal.  Otherwise, the file name
@code{gcal} ---which is burned-in during the compilation step of the
Tcal program--- is used for calling the Gcal program.  The @env{GCALPROG}
environment variable must always be set if the Gcal program is installed
under another name than the standard name @command{gcal}, otherwise Tcal
is unable to execute the Gcal program automatically!  An exit status
of 0 means all processing is successfully done, any other value means
an error has occurred.

@noindent
The program accepts the following options:

@table @option
@item --help
@arindex --help
Print a usage message listing all available options, then exit successfully.

@item --version
@arindex --version
Print the version number, then exit successfully.

@item --shift=@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{number}
@arindex --shift=@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{number}
Define the displacement in @samp{@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{number}} days the
desired date is distant from the actual date.
@end table

@node Invoking txt2gcal, Invoking gcal2txt, Invoking tcal, Gcal Utilities
@appendixsec Invoking @command{txt2gcal}
@cindex Command line options, @command{txt2gcal}
@cindex Invoking @command{txt2gcal}
@cindex The @command{txt2gcal} utility
@cindex Utility @command{txt2gcal}
@cindex @command{txt2gcal}, utility
@cindex Options of @command{txt2gcal}
@cindex @command{txt2gcal}, options

The Txt2gcal program creates a verbatim Gcal resource file from a text file.
Its arguments are as follows:

@example
txt2gcal @r{[}--help @r{|} --version@r{] | [}@var{text-file}@r{|}-@r{] [}@var{date-part}@r{]}
@end example

@noindent
If no @var{text-file} argument is given or/but a single @samp{-} character,
the program reads and processes all input received from the @emph{standard
input channel}@.  If no @var{date-part} argument is given, Txt2gcal creates
a @samp{0} for the date part.  All results are always shown on the
@emph{standard output channel}@.  An exit status of 0 means all processing
is successfully done, any other value means an error has occurred.

@page
@noindent
The program accepts the following options:

@table @option
@item --help
@arindex --help
Print a usage message listing all available options, then exit successfully.

@item --version
@arindex --version
Print the version number, then exit successfully.
@end table

Here comes an example how to use Txt2gcal.  Let us suppose there is a text
file by the name of @file{tdemo-1.txt} with the following contents:

@include examples/tdemo-1.texi

@need 2000
@noindent
and Txt2gcal processes this file, redirecting the output to @file{tdemo-1.rc}:

@include examples/tdemo-1a.texi

@noindent
then Txt2gcal has now created a new Gcal resource file @file{tdemo-1.rc}
from the text file @file{tdemo-1.txt}@.  Let us finally see, how Gcal will
interpret this new resource file:

@include examples/tdemo-1b.texi

@node Invoking gcal2txt, , Invoking txt2gcal, Gcal Utilities
@appendixsec Invoking @command{gcal2txt}
@cindex Command line options, @command{gcal2txt}
@cindex Invoking @command{gcal2txt}
@cindex The @command{gcal2txt} utility
@cindex Utility @command{gcal2txt}
@cindex @command{gcal2txt}, utility
@cindex Options of @command{gcal2txt}
@cindex @command{gcal2txt}, options

The Gcal2txt program creates a verbatim text file from a Gcal resource file.
Its arguments are as follows:

@example
gcal2txt @r{[}--help @r{|} --version@r{] | [}@var{resource-file}@r{|}-@r{]}
@end example

@noindent
If no @var{resource-file} argument is given or/but a single @samp{-} character,
the program reads and processes all input received from the @emph{standard
input channel}@.  All results are always shown on the @emph{standard output
channel}@.  An exit status of 0 means all processing is successfully done,
any other value means an error has occurred.

The sense and purpose of Gcal2txt is to retrieve all additional texts,
which are put into the output by means of the Txt2gcal program.

@noindent
The program accepts the following options:

@table @option
@item --help
@arindex --help
Print a usage message listing all available options, then exit successfully.

@item --version
@arindex --version
Print the version number, then exit successfully.
@end table

Here comes an example how to use Gcal2txt.  For that purpose, let
us use the resource file @file{tdemo-1.rc} of the previous section
(@pxref{Invoking txt2gcal, , Invoking @command{txt2gcal}}),
which was created by means of the Txt2gcal program from a text file
and which looks like this:

@include examples/tdemo-1a.texi

@noindent
Now let us see, how this resource file will be processed by Gcal2txt:

@include examples/tdemo-1c.texi

@node Internationalization, Metasymbols, Gcal Utilities, Top
@appendix Aspects in Internationalization
@cindex Aspects in Internationalization
@cindex Internationalization aspects
@cindex Native language, used

Starting with version 2.00, Gcal is able to display message texts using any
native languages instead of using the English language only, because parts
of the GNU @code{gettext} package are integrated into the Software.
@xref{Top, , Introduction, gettext, GNU gettext tools},
for more details.

@tbindex Supported native languages
@tbindex Native languages, supported
@cindex Message catalog
By default, Gcal displays all message texts using the English native
language in case no other native language is wanted.  A so-called
@emph{message catalog} is read by Gcal at run-time if message texts from
another native language are required.  Gcal @value{GCAL-VERSION} supports
the following native languages:
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@multitable @columnfractions .33 .66
@item @strong{Native Language}
@tab @strong{Language Code}
@item @
@item English
@tab @code{en}
@item German
@tab @code{de}
@item French
@tab @code{fr}
@item Dutch
@tab @code{nl}
@item Polish
@tab @code{pl}
@item Russian
@tab @code{ru}
@item Swedish
@tab @code{sv}
@end multitable
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@tbindex Selection of native language
@tbindex Native language, selection
@cindex Selection of native language
@cindex Native language, selection
@noindent
It is only necessary to set one of the environment variables@footnote{Listed
in decreasing priority as they are respected.}:

@multitable @columnfractions .04 .96
@item 1.
@vindex LANGUAGE
@cindex @env{LANGUAGE} environment variable
@cindex Environment variable, @env{LANGUAGE}
@tab @env{LANGUAGE}
@item 2.
@vindex LC_ALL
@cindex @env{LC_ALL} environment variable
@cindex Environment variable, @env{LC_ALL}
@tab @env{LC_ALL}
@item 3.
@vindex LC_MESSAGES
@cindex @env{LC_MESSAGES} environment variable
@cindex Environment variable, @env{LC_MESSAGES}
@tab @env{LC_MESSAGES}
@item 4.
@vindex LANG
@cindex @env{LANG} environment variable
@cindex Environment variable, @env{LANG}
@tab @env{LANG}
@end multitable

@noindent
with a language code to select another native language instead of the
English native language.
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

Normally, users only have to set the @env{LANG} environment variable to tell
Gcal the native language to use at run-time level.  Presuming users want to
run Gcal using the German native language for displaying message texts, they
merely have to execute @w{@samp{setenv LANG de}} (in @command{csh}) or
@w{@samp{export LANG; LANG=de}} (in @command{sh}) at the shell prompt.
Of course they could even do this from their @file{.login} or @file{.profile}
file.
@xref{Users, , The User's View, gettext, GNU gettext tools},
for more details.

@cindex @acronym{ISO}-639:1988
@cindex Language codes
@cindex Simple language code information
@cindex Language code information, simple
As shown above, a simple setting of @code{de} in the environment variable
@env{LANG} is sufficient to enable German message texts.  @code{de} is the
two-letter language code for the German language defined in the
@acronym{ISO}-639:1988, and is called @dfn{simple language code information}
in the further context.  Other language codes can be taken from this
@acronym{ISO}-document@footnote{For example @code{fr} for French, @code{es}
for Spanish@enddots{}}@.

@need 1500
@cindex Native language defaults
@cindex Defaults of native language
Because Gcal as calendar program must also comply the specifics of a used
native language concerning the ordering of day, month and year (and further
things) of a displayed date, the period of Gregorian Reformation, the type
of week number and the representation of calendar sheets, these criteria are
likewise bound to the language code@footnote{Strictly speaking, an extended
language code information.}@.

@noindent
A @code{en} language code causes the following internal defaults of above
criteria:

@itemize @bullet
@item
U.S. American date format

@item
Gregorian Reformation has occurred 1752

@item
Week starts on Sunday

@item
Standard week numbers

@item
Representation of calendar sheet

@example
@group
   September 1994
Su Mo Tu We Th Fr Sa
             1  2  3
 4  5  6  7  8  9 10
11 12 13 14 15 16 17
18 19 20 21 22 23 24
25 26 27 28 29 30
@end group
@end example
@end itemize

@noindent
And a @code{de} language code@footnote{Or other language codes, for which
a @emph{message catalog} will be created and distributed in future.}
causes the following internal defaults:

@itemize @bullet
@item
German date format

@item
Gregorian Reformation has occurred 1582

@item
Week starts on Monday

@item
@acronym{ISO}-8601:1988 week numbers

@item
Representation of calendar sheet

@example
@group
September 1994

Monday          5 12 19 26
Tuesday         6 13 20 27
Wednesday       7 14 21 28
Thursday     1  8 15 22 29
Friday       2  9 16 23 30
Saturday     3 10 17 24
Sunday       4 11 18 25
@end group
@end example
@end itemize

Remember, all these internal defaults are modifiable by the options
@option{--date-format}, @option{--gregorian-reform}, @option{--starting-day},
@option{--iso-week-number} and @option{--type}@.

@need 2000
If no language code is detected, Gcal takes the internal defaults of the
@code{en} language code@footnote{Or to be more precise, of the extended
language code information @w{@code{en_US}}@.}@.

If a language code is specified for which no @emph{message catalog} is
installed, Gcal takes the internal defaults of the @code{de} language code,
but displays the message texts using the English native language.  Actually,
this behavior seems to me the most proper solution in such a case.  The English
native language is spoken all over the world unlike the German or other native
languages, so it is wise to use it here.  But the other criteria bound to the
English native language are so special for users of other native languages,
that it is wise to use the criteria taken for internal defaults of the
@code{de} language code, because most European countries (taken as standard)
essentially use them.

@cindex @acronym{ISO}-3166
@cindex Country code
@cindex Territory code
@cindex Extended language code information
@cindex Language code information, extended
@vindex LANG
Now British users will certainly ask whether they could use their date format
as an internal default@footnote{All other internal defaults of the simple
@code{en} language code information just meet their criteria.}@.  The answer
to this is a simple @cite{yes}, nevertheless, these users have to set the
environment variable @env{LANG} with an @dfn{extended language code
information} instead of a simple language code information.
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@noindent
The usual template of an extended language code information is as follows:

@itemize @bullet
@item
For XPG syntax (X/Open Portability Guide):
@smallexample
@var{language}@r{[}_@var{territory}@r{][}.@var{codeset}@r{][}@@@var{modifier}@r{]}
@end smallexample

@item
For CEN syntax (Comit@'e Europ@'en de Normalisation):
@smallexample
@var{language}@r{[}_@var{territory}@r{][}+@var{audience}@r{][}+@var{special}@r{][},@var{sponsor}@r{][}_@var{revision}@r{]}
@end smallexample
@end itemize
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

Both syntaxes contain the @var{language} and @var{territory} components,
which are used by Gcal to select the native language and the other criteria.
The @var{language} component is equivalent to the simple language code
information and the @var{territory} component is a two-letter territory or
country code as defined by the @acronym{ISO}-3166 like @samp{GB} for Great
Britain or @samp{US} for the U.S.A@.  See the pertinent literature for more
details.  So British users only have to set the @env{LANG} environment
variable with a @w{@code{en_GB}} contents, and after that, they can use the
British date format as an internal default.

@node Metasymbols, Regular Expressions, Internationalization, Top
@appendix Metasymbols
@tbindex Used metasymbols
@tbindex Metasymbols, used
@cindex Metasymbols within this document, table
@cindex Table of all Metasymbols within this document

Within this document, the following @emph{metasyntactic} conventions will be
used when discussing command line options, commands, arguments and templates:
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@table @code
@item @var{n}
Argument is not optional and @var{n} must be a valid number.

@item e@r{|}t@r{|}@var{dvar}
Argument is not optional and must be a single alphabetic character.

@item $@var{tvar}
Argument is not optional and must be a single alphabetic character,
that is lead by a @samp{$} character.

@item @r{[}@var{text}@r{]}
Argument is optional and @var{text} is a valid string of text.

@item @r{[}@var{a}@var{b}@r{]}
Arguments are optional, any number may be used in any order, e.g.@::

@example
@var{NOTHING}, @var{a}, @var{b}, @var{a}@var{b}, @var{b}@var{a} @dots{}
@end example

@item @r{@{}@var{a}@var{b}@r{@}}
Arguments are not optional, minimum one up to any number may be used
in any order, e.g.@::

@example
@var{a}, @var{b}, @var{a}@var{b}, @var{b}@var{a} @dots{}
@end example

@item @r{[}@var{a}@r{|}@var{b}@r{]}
Arguments are optional, select either @var{a} or @var{b}, but not both.

@item @var{a}@r{|}@var{b}
Arguments are not optional, select either @var{a} or @var{b}, but not both.

@item @r{[}@var{a}@r{[}@var{b}@r{]]}
Arguments are optional, select either @var{a} or @var{a}@var{b}, but
not @var{b}@.

@item @r{[}@var{a}@r{|}@var{b}@r{[}@var{c}@r{]}@r{]}
Arguments are optional, select @var{a} or @var{b} or @var{a}@var{c}
or @var{b}@var{c}, but not @var{c}@.

@item @r{[}@var{a}@r{|}@var{b}@var{c}@r{]}
Arguments are optional, select either @var{a}@var{c} or @var{b}@var{c},
but not @var{a} or @var{b} or @var{c}@.

@item @r{[}@var{a}@r{]|[}@var{b}@r{]}
Argument @emph{lists} are optional, select either list @var{a} or list
@var{b}, but not both.

@item @r{[@dots{}]}
Additional arguments/files may be specified and are optional.
@end table

@node Regular Expressions, Regexp Summary, Metasymbols, Top
@appendix Regular Expressions
@c
@c This appendix is derived from the gawk-3.0.0 and regex-0.12 manuals.
@c
@cindex Pattern, regular expressions
@cindex Regexp
@cindex Regular expression
@cindex Regular expressions as patterns

@menu
* Regexp Usage::      How to Use Regular Expressions.
* Regexp Operators::  Regular Expression Operators.
@end menu

This appendix is derived from the @code{gawk-3.0.0} and @code{regex-0.12}
manuals.

A @dfn{regular expression}, or @dfn{regexp}, is a way of describing a
set of strings.  The simplest regular expression is a sequence of letters,
numbers, or both.  Such a regexp matches any string that contains that
sequence.  Thus, the regexp @samp{foo} matches any string containing
@samp{foo}@.  Other kinds of regular expressions let you specify more
complicated classes of strings.

@tbindex Supported regular expression programming libraries
@tbindex Regular expression programming libraries, supported
Gcal uses exactly one of the following regular expression programming
libraries respectively methods, and that in the decreasing priority how
it is chosen at configuration time, or better, compile time of the
software:
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

@multitable @columnfractions .05 .75 .2
@item @strong{No.}
@tab @strong{Function}
@tab @strong{Symbol}
@item @
@item 1.
@tab GNU @code{re_compile_pattern()} and @file{regex.h}
@tab @code{GNU-REGEX}
@item 2.
@tab POSIX @code{regcomp()} and @file{regex.h}
@tab @code{POSIX-REGEX}
@item 3.
@tab BSD @code{re_comp()}
@tab @code{BSD-REGEX}
@item 4.
@tab System V @code{regcmp()}
@tab @code{SysV-REGEX}
@item 5.
@tab Henry Spencer V8 @code{regcomp()} and @file{regexp.h}
@tab @code{V8-REGEX}
@item 6.
@tab Pattern matching is supported, but without metacharacters
@tab @code{NO-REGEX}
@end multitable

@noindent
Try @w{@samp{gcal --version}} for detecting the kind of regular expression
programming library respectively method that is burned in your Gcal program!

@node Regexp Usage, Regexp Operators, Regular Expressions, Regular Expressions
@appendixsec How to Use Regular Expressions
@cindex How to use regular expressions
@cindex Regular expressions, how to use

A regular expression can be used as a pattern if Gcal's
@w{@option{--filter-text=@var{pattern}}} option is specified
at program start-up.

@xref{x-filter-text, , Fixed date option @option{--filter-text=@var{pattern}}},
for more details.

Then the regular expression is tested against the entire, completely
expanded text of each @strong{valid} fixed date, and the fixed date
is only displayed in case the pattern matches the text@footnote{Normally,
it only needs to match some part of the text in order to succeed.}@.

@node Regexp Operators, , Regexp Usage, Regular Expressions
@appendixsec Regular Expression Operators
@cindex Metacharacters, regexp
@cindex Regexp metacharacters
@cindex Operators, regexp
@cindex Regexp operators
@cindex Regular expression metacharacters
@cindex Regular expression operators

You can combine regular expressions with the following characters,
called @dfn{regular expression operators}, or @dfn{metacharacters}, to
increase the power and versatility of regular expressions.

@page
Here is a table of these metacharacters.  All characters that are not
listed in the table stand for themselves.

@table @code
@item \
@cindex Metacharacter, @code{\} regexp
@cindex Regexp metacharacter, @code{\}
@cindex @code{\} regexp, metacharacter
@cindex Regular expression metacharacter, @code{\}
This is used to suppress the special meaning of a character when
matching.  For example:

@example
\$
@end example

matches the character @samp{$}@.

@item ^
@cindex Anchors in regexp
@cindex Regexp, anchors
@cindex Anchor metacharacter, @code{^} regexp
@cindex Regexp anchor metacharacter, @code{^}
@cindex @code{^} regexp, anchor metacharacter
@cindex Regular expression anchor metacharacter, @code{^}
This matches the beginning of a string.  For example:

@example
^@@chapter
@end example

matches the @samp{@@chapter} at the beginning of a string, and can be used
to identify chapter beginnings in Texinfo source files.
The @samp{^} is known as an @dfn{anchor}, since it anchors the pattern to
matching only at the beginning of the string.

@item $
@cindex Anchor metacharacter, @code{$} regexp
@cindex Regexp anchor metacharacter, @code{$}
@cindex @code{$} regexp, anchor metacharacter
@cindex Regular expression anchor metacharacter, @code{$}
This is similar to @samp{^}, but it matches only at the end of a string.
For example:

@example
p$
@end example

matches a string that ends with a @samp{p}@.  The @samp{$} is also an anchor.

@item .
@cindex Metacharacter, @code{.} regexp
@cindex Regexp metacharacter, @code{.}
@cindex @code{.} regexp, metacharacter
@cindex Regular expression metacharacter, @code{.}
The period, or dot, matches any single character.  For example:

@example
.P
@end example

matches any single character followed by a @samp{P} in a string.  Using
concatenation we can make a regular expression like @w{@samp{U.A}}, which
matches any three-character sequence that begins with @samp{U} and ends
with @samp{A}@.

@item [@r{@dots{}}]
@cindex Character list, regexp
@cindex Regexp, character list
@cindex Character list, @code{[@r{@dots{}}]} regexp
@cindex Regexp character list, @code{[@r{@dots{}}]}
@cindex @code{[@r{@dots{}}]} regexp, character list
@cindex Regular expression character list, @code{[@r{@dots{}}]}
This is called a @dfn{character list}@.  It matches any @emph{one} of the
characters that are enclosed in the square brackets.  For example:

@example
[MVX]
@end example

matches any one of the characters @samp{M}, @samp{V}, or @samp{X} in a string.

Ranges of characters are indicated by using a hyphen between the beginning
and ending characters, and enclosing the whole thing in brackets.  For
example:

@example
[0-9]
@end example

matches any digit.
Multiple ranges are allowed. E.g., the list @w{@code{[A-Za-z0-9]}} is a
common way to express the idea of ``all alphanumeric characters.''

To include one of the characters @samp{\}, @samp{]}, @samp{-} or @samp{^}
in a character list, put a @samp{\} in front of it.  For example:

@example
[d\]]
@end example

matches either @samp{d}, or @samp{]}@.

@cindex Character classes, regexp
@cindex Regexp, character classes
@cindex POSIX regexp
@cindex Regexp, POSIX
@cindex Character classes, @code{[:@var{keyword}:]} regexp
@cindex Regexp character classes, @code{[:@var{keyword}:]}
@cindex @code{[:@var{keyword}:]} regexp, character classes
@cindex Regular expression character classes, @code{[:@var{keyword}:]}
@dfn{Character classes} are a new feature introduced in the POSIX standard.
A character class is a special notation for describing
lists of characters that have a specific attribute, but where the
actual characters themselves can vary from country to country and/or
from character set to character set.  For example, the notion of what
is an alphabetic character differs in the U.S.A.@: and in France.

A character class is only valid in a regexp @emph{inside} the
brackets of a character list.  Character classes consist of @samp{[:},
a keyword denoting the class, and @samp{:]}@.  Here are the character
classes defined by the POSIX standard:

@need 1500
@table @code
@item [:alnum:]
@cindex Character class, @code{[:alnum:]} regexp
@cindex Regexp character class, @code{[:alnum:]}
@cindex @code{[:alnum:]} regexp, character class
@cindex Regular expression character class, @code{[:alnum:]}
Alphanumeric characters.

@item [:alpha:]
@cindex Character class, @code{[:alpha:]} regexp
@cindex Regexp character class, @code{[:alpha:]}
@cindex @code{[:alpha:]} regexp, character class
@cindex Regular expression character class, @code{[:alpha:]}
Alphabetic characters.

@item [:blank:]
@cindex Character class, @code{[:blank:]} regexp
@cindex Regexp character class, @code{[:blank:]}
@cindex @code{[:blank:]} regexp, character class
@cindex Regular expression character class, @code{[:blank:]}
Space and tab characters.

@item [:cntrl:]
@cindex Character class, @code{[:cntrl:]} regexp
@cindex Regexp character class, @code{[:cntrl:]}
@cindex @code{[:cntrl:]} regexp, character class
@cindex Regular expression character class, @code{[:cntrl:]}
Control characters.

@item [:digit:]
@cindex Character class, @code{[:digit:]} regexp
@cindex Regexp character class, @code{[:digit:]}
@cindex @code{[:digit:]} regexp, character class
@cindex Regular expression character class, @code{[:digit:]}
Numeric characters.

@item [:graph:]
@cindex Character class, @code{[:graph:]} regexp
@cindex Regexp character class, @code{[:graph:]}
@cindex @code{[:graph:]} regexp, character class
@cindex Regular expression character class, @code{[:graph:]}
Characters that are printable and are also visible@footnote{A space is
printable, but not visible, while an @samp{a} is both.}@.

@item [:lower:]
@cindex Character class, @code{[:lower:]} regexp
@cindex Regexp character class, @code{[:lower:]}
@cindex @code{[:lower:]} regexp, character class
@cindex Regular expression character class, @code{[:lower:]}
Lower-case alphabetic characters.

@item [:print:]
@cindex Character class, @code{[:print:]} regexp
@cindex Regexp character class, @code{[:print:]}
@cindex @code{[:print:]} regexp, character class
@cindex Regular expression character class, @code{[:print:]}
Printable characters@footnote{Characters that are not control characters.}@.

@item [:punct:]
@cindex Character class, @code{[:punct:]} regexp
@cindex Regexp character class, @code{[:punct:]}
@cindex @code{[:punct:]} regexp, character class
@cindex Regular expression character class, @code{[:punct:]}
Punctuation characters@footnote{Characters that are not letter, digits,
control characters, or space characters.}@.

@item [:space:]
@cindex Character class, @code{[:space:]} regexp
@cindex Regexp character class, @code{[:space:]}
@cindex @code{[:space:]} regexp, character class
@cindex Regular expression character class, @code{[:space:]}
Space characters@footnote{Such as Space, Tab, and Form-feed, to name a few.}@.

@item [:upper:]
@cindex Character class, @code{[:upper:]} regexp
@cindex Regexp character class, @code{[:upper:]}
@cindex @code{[:upper:]} regexp, character class
@cindex Regular expression character class, @code{[:upper:]}
Upper-case alphabetic characters.

@item [:xdigit:]
@cindex Character class, @code{[:xdigit:]} regexp
@cindex Regexp character class, @code{[:xdigit:]}
@cindex @code{[:xdigit:]} regexp, character class
@cindex Regular expression character class, @code{[:xdigit:]}
Characters that are hexadecimal digits.
@end table

For example, before the POSIX standard, to match alphanumeric
characters, you had to write @w{@code{[A-Za-z0-9]}}@.  If your
character set had other alphabetic characters in it, this would not
match them.  With the POSIX character classes, you can write
@w{@code{[[:alnum:]]}}, and this will match @emph{all} the alphabetic
and numeric characters in your character set.

@cindex Collating elements, regexp
@cindex Regexp, collating elements
Two additional special sequences can appear in character lists.
These apply to non-@sc{ascii} character sets, which can have single symbols
(called @dfn{collating elements}) that are represented with more than one
character, as well as several characters that are equivalent for
collating, or sorting, purposes.  (E.g., in French, a plain @samp{e}
and a grave-accented @samp{@`e} are equivalent.)

@need 2000
@table @asis
@item Collating Symbols
@cindex Collating symbols, regexp
@cindex Regexp, collating symbols
@cindex Collating symbols, @code{[.@var{element}.]} regexp
@cindex Regexp collating symbols, @code{[.@var{element}.]}
@cindex @code{[.@var{element}.]} regexp, collating symbols
@cindex Regular expression collating symbols, @code{[.@var{element}.]}
A @dfn{collating symbol} is a multi-character collating element enclosed in
@samp{[.} and @samp{.]}@.  For example, if @samp{ch} is a collating element,
then @w{@code{[[.ch.]]}} is a regexp that matches this collating element,
while @w{@code{[ch]}} is a regexp that matches either @samp{c} or @samp{h}@.

@item Equivalence Classes
@cindex Equivalence classes, regexp
@cindex Regexp, equivalence classes
@cindex Equivalence classes, @code{[=@var{list}=]} regexp
@cindex Regexp equivalence classes, @code{[=@var{list}=]}
@cindex @code{[=@var{list}=]} regexp, equivalence classes
@cindex Regular expression equivalence class, @code{[=@var{list}=]}
An @dfn{equivalence class} is a list of equivalent characters enclosed in
@samp{[=} and @samp{=]}@.  Thus, @code{[[=e@`e=]]} is a regexp that matches
either @samp{e} or @samp{@`e}@.
@end table

These features are very valuable in non-English speaking locales.

@strong{Caution:}@*
The library functions that Gcal uses for regular expression matching
currently only recognize POSIX character classes (possibly); they do
not recognize collating symbols or equivalence classes.

@item [^ @r{@dots{}}]
@cindex Complemented character list, regexp
@cindex Regexp, complemented character list
@cindex Character list in regexp, complemented
@cindex Negated character list, regexp
@cindex Regexp, negated character list
@cindex Character list in regexp, negated
@cindex Complemented character list, @code{[^ @r{@dots{}}]} regexp
@cindex Regexp complemented character list, @code{[^ @r{@dots{}}]}
@cindex @code{[^ @r{@dots{}}]} regexp, complemented character list
@cindex Regular expression complemented character list, @code{[^ @r{@dots{}}]}
This is a @dfn{negated character list} respectively @dfn{complemented
character list}@.  The first character after the @samp{[} @emph{must}
be a @samp{^}@.  It matches any characters @emph{except} those in the
square brackets.  For example:

@example
[^0-9]
@end example

matches any character that is not a digit.

@item |
@cindex Operator, @code{|} regexp
@cindex Regexp operator, @code{|}
@cindex @code{|} regexp, operator
@cindex Regular expression operator, @code{|}
This is the @dfn{alternation operator}, and it is used to specify
alternatives.  For example:

@example
^P|[0-9]
@end example

matches any string that matches either @samp{^P} or @w{@samp{[0-9]}}@.  This
means it matches any string that starts with @samp{P} or contains a digit.

The alternation applies to the largest possible regexps on either side.
In other words, @samp{|} has the lowest precedence of all the regular
expression operators.

@item (@r{@dots{}})
@cindex Grouping, @code{(@r{@dots{}})} regexp
@cindex Regexp grouping, @code{(@r{@dots{}})}
@cindex @code{(@r{@dots{}})} regexp, grouping
@cindex Regular expression grouping, @code{(@r{@dots{}})}
Parentheses are used for grouping in regular expressions as in arithmetic.
They can be used to concatenate regular expressions containing the alternation
operator, @samp{|}@.  For example, @w{@samp{@@(samp|code)\@{[^@}]+\@}}} matches
both @w{@samp{@@code@{foo@}}} and @w{@samp{@@samp@{bar@}}}@. (These are Texinfo
formatting control sequences.)

@item *
@cindex Operator, @code{*} regexp
@cindex Regexp operator, @code{*}
@cindex @code{*} regexp, operator
@cindex Regular expression operator, @code{*}
This symbol means that the preceding regular expression is to be
repeated as many times as necessary to find a match.  For example:

@example
ph*
@end example

applies the @samp{*} symbol to the preceding @samp{h} and looks for matches
of one @samp{p} followed by any number of @samp{h}s.  This will also match
just @samp{p} if no @samp{h}s are present.

The @samp{*} repeats the @emph{smallest} possible preceding expression.
(Use parentheses if you wish to repeat a larger expression.)  It finds
as many repetitions as possible.  For example:

@example
gcal --filter-text='\(c[ad][ad]*r x\)' -f sample.rc -y
@end example

prints every fixed date in @file{sample.rc} containing a fixed date text
of the form @w{@samp{(car x)}}, @w{@samp{(cdr x)}}, @w{@samp{(cadr x)}},
and so on.  Notice the escaping of the parentheses by preceding them with
backslashes.

@item +
@cindex Operator, @code{+} regexp
@cindex Regexp operator, @code{+}
@cindex @code{+} regexp, operator
@cindex Regular expression operator, @code{+}
This symbol is similar to @samp{*}, but the preceding expression must be
matched at least once.  This means that:

@example
wh+y
@end example

would match @w{@samp{why}} and @w{@samp{whhy}} but not @w{@samp{wy}}, whereas
@w{@samp{wh*y}} would match all three of these strings.  This is a simpler
way of writing the last @samp{*} example:

@example
gcal --filter-text='\(c[ad]+r x\)' -f sample.rc -y
@end example

@item ?
@cindex Operator, @code{?} regexp
@cindex Regexp operator, @code{?}
@cindex @code{?} regexp, operator
@cindex Regular expression operator, @code{?}
This symbol is similar to @samp{*}, but the preceding expression can be
matched either once or not at all.  For example:

@example
fe?d
@end example

will match @w{@samp{fed}} and @w{@samp{fd}}, but nothing else.

@item @{@var{n}@}
@itemx @{@var{n},@}
@itemx @{@var{n},@var{m}@}
@cindex Interval expressions, regexp
@cindex Regexp, interval expressions
@cindex POSIX regexp
@cindex Regexp, POSIX
@cindex Interval expressions, @code{@{@var{expression}@}} regexp
@cindex Regexp interval expressions, @code{@{@var{expression}@}}
@cindex @code{@{@var{expression}@}} regexp, interval expressions
@cindex Regular expression interval expressions, @code{@{@var{expression}@}}
One or two numbers inside braces denote an @dfn{interval expression}
which is available in the POSIX standard.  If there is one number in
the braces, the preceding regexp is repeated @var{n} times.
If there are two numbers separated by a comma, the preceding regexp is
repeated @var{n} to @var{m} times.  If there is one number followed by
a comma, then the preceding regexp is repeated at least @var{n} times.

@table @code
@item wh@{3@}y
matches @w{@samp{whhhy}} but not @w{@samp{why}} or @w{@samp{whhhhy}}@.

@item wh@{3,5@}y
matches @w{@samp{whhhy}} or @w{@samp{whhhhy}} or @w{@samp{whhhhhy}}, only.

@item wh@{2,@}y
matches @w{@samp{whhy}} or @w{@samp{whhhy}}, and so on.
@end table
@end table

@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@cindex Regexp operators, GNU specific
@cindex GNU specific regexp operators
GNU software that deals with regular expressions provides a number of
additional regexp operators.  These operators are described here.

@cindex Regexp, definition of a word
@cindex Word, regexp definition
Most of the additional operators are for dealing with word matching.
For our purposes, a @dfn{word} is a sequence of one or more letters, digits,
or underscores (@samp{_})@.

@table @code
@item \w
@cindex Operator, @code{\w} regexp
@cindex Regexp operator, @code{\w}
@cindex @code{\w} regexp, operator
@cindex Regular expression operator, @code{\w}
This operator matches any word-constituent character, i.e.@: any
letter, digit, or underscore. Think of it as a short-hand for
@w{@code{[A-Za-z0-9_]}} or
@w{@code{[[:alnum:]_]}}@.

@item \W
@cindex Operator, @code{\W} regexp
@cindex Regexp operator, @code{\W}
@cindex @code{\W} regexp, operator
@cindex Regular expression operator, @code{\W}
This operator matches any character that is not word-constituent.
Think of it as a short-hand for
@w{@code{[^A-Za-z0-9_]}} or
@w{@code{[^[:alnum:]_]}}@.

@item \<
@cindex Operator, @code{\<} regexp
@cindex Regexp operator, @code{\<}
@cindex @code{\<} regexp, operator
@cindex Regular expression operator, @code{\<}
This operator matches the empty string at the beginning of a word.
For example, @code{\<away} matches @samp{away}, but not
@samp{stowaway}@.

@item \>
@cindex Operator, @code{\>} regexp
@cindex Regexp operator, @code{\>}
@cindex @code{\>} regexp, operator
@cindex Regular expression operator, @code{\>}
This operator matches the empty string at the end of a word.
For example, @code{stow\>} matches @samp{stow}, but not @samp{stowaway}@.

@item \b
@cindex Word boundaries, matching in regexp
@cindex Matching word boundaries in regexp
@cindex Regexp, matching word boundaries
@cindex Operator, @code{\b} regexp
@cindex Regexp operator, @code{\b}
@cindex @code{\b} regexp, operator
@cindex Regular expression operator, @code{\b}
This operator matches the empty string at either the beginning or the
end of a word (the word @strong{b}oundary)@.  For example, @samp{\bballs?\b}
matches either @samp{ball} or @samp{balls} as a separate word.

@item \B
@cindex Operator, @code{\B} regexp
@cindex Regexp operator, @code{\B}
@cindex @code{\B} regexp, operator
@cindex Regular expression operator, @code{\B}
This operator matches the empty string within a word. In other words,
@samp{\B} matches the empty string that occurs between two
word-constituent characters. For example,
@code{\Brat\B} matches @samp{crate}, but it does not match @samp{dirty rat}@.
@samp{\B} is essentially the opposite of @samp{\b}@.
@end table

@cindex Buffer, regexp
@cindex Regexp, buffer
There are two other operators that work on buffers.  In Emacs, a
@dfn{buffer} is, naturally, an Emacs buffer.  For other programs, the
regexp library routines that Gcal uses consider the entire string to
be matched as the buffer@footnote{That is the @emph{text part} of a Gcal
resource file line.}@.

For Gcal, since @samp{^} and @samp{$} always work in terms of the beginning
and end of strings, these operators do not add any new capabilities.  They are
provided for compatibility with other GNU software.

@cindex Buffer matching operators, regexp
@cindex Regexp, buffer matching operators
@table @code
@item \`
@cindex Operator, @code{\`} regexp
@cindex Regexp operator, @code{\`}
@cindex @code{\`} regexp, operator
@cindex Regular expression operator, @code{\`}
This operator matches the empty string at the beginning of the buffer.

@item \'
@cindex Operator, @code{\'} regexp
@cindex Regexp operator, @code{\'}
@cindex @code{\'} regexp, operator
@cindex Regular expression operator, @code{\'}
This operator matches the empty string at the end of the buffer.
@end table

@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@cindex Precedence, regexp operators
@cindex Regexp operators, precedence
In regular expressions, the @samp{*}, @samp{+}, and @samp{?} operators,
as well as the braces @samp{@{} and @samp{@}}, have the highest precedence,
followed by concatenation, and finally by @samp{|}@.  As in arithmetic,
parentheses can change how operators are grouped.

@cindex Case sensitivity in matching, regexp
@cindex Regexp, case sensitivity in matching
Case is normally significant in regular expressions, both when matching
ordinary characters (i.e.@: not metacharacters), and inside character
sets.  Thus a @samp{w} in a regular expression matches only a lower-case
@samp{w} and not an upper-case @samp{W}@.

@cindex Ignoring case distinctions in regular expression
@cindex Ignoring case, regexp
@cindex Regular expression, ignoring case distinctions
@cindex Regexp, ignoring case
The simplest way to do a case-independent match is to use a character
list: @w{@samp{[Ww]}}@.  However, this can be cumbersome if you need to use it
often; and unfortunately, it can make the regular expressions harder to read.
Supplying a want, Gcal offers the @option{--ignore-case} option which ignores
all case distinctions in both the regular expression and the completely
expanded text of each @strong{valid} fixed date.
@xref{x-ignore-case, , Fixed date option @option{--ignore-case}}.

@node Regexp Summary, Special Texts, Regular Expressions, Top
@appendix Summary of all Regular Expressions
@tbindex Regular expressions
@cindex Regular expressions, short-list
@cindex Regular expressions, summary
@cindex Summary of all regular expressions
@cindex Short-list of all regular expressions

Regular expressions are based on POSIX EREs (Extended Regular Expressions)@.
Regexps are composed of characters.  Here is a short-list of them all:
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@table @code
@item @var{c}
matches the character @var{c} (assuming @var{c} is none of the characters
listed below)@.

@item \@var{c}
matches the literal character @var{c}@.

@item .
matches any character.

@item ^
matches the beginning of a string.

@item $
matches the end of a string.

@item [@var{abc}@r{@dots{}}]
matches any of the characters @var{abc}@dots{} (character list)@.

@item [[:@var{keyword}:]]
matches any character in the character class @var{keyword}@.
Allowable classes are @code{alnum}, @code{alpha}, @code{blank},
@code{cntrl}, @code{digit}, @code{graph}, @code{lower}, @code{print},
@code{punct}, @code{space}, @code{upper}, and @code{xdigit}@.

@item [[.@var{element}.]]
matches the multi-character collating @var{element}@.
Gcal does not currently support collating symbols.

@item [[=@var{list}=]]
matches any of the equivalent characters in @var{list}@.
Gcal does not currently support equivalence classes.

@item [^@var{abc}@r{@dots{}}]
matches any character except @var{abc}@dots{} (negated resp.@:
complemented character list)@.

@item @var{r1}|@var{r2}
matches either @var{r1} or @var{r2} (alternation)@.

@item @var{r1r2}
matches @var{r1}, and then @var{r2} (concatenation)@.

@item @var{r}+
matches one or more @var{r}'s.

@item @var{r}*
matches zero or more @var{r}'s.

@item @var{r}?
matches zero or one @var{r}'s.

@item (@var{r})
matches @var{r} (grouping)@.

@item @var{r}@{@var{n}@}
@itemx @var{r}@{@var{n},@}
@itemx @var{r}@{@var{n},@var{m}@}
matches at least @var{n}, @var{n} to any number, or @var{n} to @var{m}
occurrences of @var{r} (interval expressions)@.

@item \b
matches the empty string at either the beginning or the
end of a word.

@item \B
matches the empty string within a word.

@item \<
matches the empty string at the beginning of a word.

@item \>
matches the empty string at the end of a word.

@item \w
matches any word-constituent character (alphanumeric characters and
the underscore)@.

@item \W
matches any character that is not word-constituent.

@item \`
matches the empty string at the beginning of a buffer@footnote{The same
as a @emph{text part} of a resource file line in Gcal.}@.

@item \'
matches the empty string at the end of a buffer.
@end table

@node Special Texts, Special Texts Summary, Regexp Summary, Top
@appendix @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} Special Texts
@cindex @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} special texts, description
@cindex Description of all @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} special texts

@menu
* Exclusions::     How to Exclude dates.
* Replacements::   How to Replace texts.
* Shell Command::  How to run a Shell Command.
@end menu

The @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} special texts which can be used in the text part
of a Gcal resource file line can coarsely be separated into three categories.
So there are special texts used for suppression output of fixed dates in
definite cases.  Others are replaced by particular texts or cause the shell
to start external commands.
@xref{Special Texts processed, , @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} Special Texts},
for a general description of the special texts which may be used
in the text part of a Gcal resource file line.

@cindex Format instruction
@cindex Limitations concerning the assignment of special texts to text variables
@cindex Assignment of special texts to text variables, limitations
Some of these special texts may have an optional format instruction (called
@var{format} in the further context), which affects the representation
of an expanded special text.
@xref{Format Instruction},
for the detailed description of the format instruction and its components.
A possibly specified @var{format} within special texts which may not have
a format instruction is ignored by Gcal and not displayed in output.

But Gcal is also able to represent such special texts in a special way by
using a format instruction, and that by using an indirect method.  For
displaying, you simply assign the special text exclusively to a text variable
which contains a format instruction.  Nevertheless, it is important to note
that the field width component of the format instruction is chosen in the
way that it refers to the assigned contents of the text variable, if the
format instruction has a fixed format component.  The contents assigned to
the text variable is only the special text, and not its expanded result.
Gcal has to proceed like that, because the special text which is hidden
in the text variable could not be used (here: displayed) only for a definite
date, but possibly also for several dates, and that adjusted to each date it
is referenced.  Thus exists a special text in the text variable which has a
definite length, and a format instruction also exists, whose field width
component has to affect the expanded result of the special text.  Indeed,
Gcal does not know at the moment when the assignment of the special text to
the text variable is made, of which length the expanded result will be,
because this expansion is made at a much later phase in the program execution.
So, in such a case, the field width component of a format instruction should
have the length of the special text minimum, otherwise it is crippled and
expanded respectively displayed incorrectly by the internal methods which
effect the expansion.

Of course, not all possibilities concerning the representation ---which are
offered by the format instruction--- are listed here for those special texts
those expanded representation may be affected by an optional @var{format}
instruction, but only some few exemplary.

And some of these special texts may also have an optional simple or special
date argument (called @var{date} in the further context) or another argument
(called @var{argument} in the further context)@.  The @var{date} argument
must be given in one of the following date formats in case a special text
is directly trailed by it:

@itemize @bullet
@item @w{@code{@var{yyyy}@r{[}@var{mm}@r{[}@var{dd}@r{|}@var{www}@var{n}@r{]]}}}

@item @w{@code{@var{yyyy}*d@r{|}w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}}}

@item @w{@code{@var{yyyy}@@e@r{|}t@r{|}@var{dvar}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]]}}}
@end itemize

Special texts that may have a @var{date} argument @strong{must} always be
trailed by a @emph{whitespace} character which is removed in output,
no matter whether @var{date} was given or not!

@xref{Special Texts Summary, , Summary of all @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} Special Texts},
for a short-list of all applicable special texts.

@node Exclusions, Replacements, Special Texts, Special Texts
@appendixsec @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} special texts for date exclusion
@cindex @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} special texts, date exclusion
@cindex Special texts @code{%@var{?}}@dots{}, date exclusion
@cindex Date exclusion @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} special texts

@menu
* Exclusions with date argument::
* Exclusions without any argument::
@end menu

@code{%@var{?}}@dots{} special texts used for exclusion of points of time or
periods of dates are very useful if they are used together with ranges of days
(@pxref{Ranges of days})@.
The complete special text is always suppressed in output
in case the fixed date text must be displayed.

@node Exclusions with date argument, Exclusions without any argument, Exclusions, Exclusions
@appendixsubsec Exclusions with date argument @code{%@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special texts
@cindex @code{%@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special texts, exclusions with date argument
@cindex Special texts @code{%@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, exclusions with date argument
@cindex Exclusions with date argument @code{%@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special texts

@menu
* Inclusive date period::
* Exclusive date period::
@end menu

@cindex Inclusive date period
@cindex Period, inclusive date
@cindex Exclusive date period
@cindex Period, Exclusive date
First of all, an @dfn{inclusive date} period
@code{%@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
can be specified with the effect, that only those
fixed dates are respected and displayed which are
part of this period.  And the specification of an
@dfn{exclusive date} period @code{%@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}
special text has the effect, that only those fixed dates are respected
and displayed which are not part of this period.

Cleverly combined, these special texts offer very effective
filtration capabilities used for the definition of special
periods in a highly flexible manner, for example:

@example
0*d1#999 Every day of year: from January@dots{}August except April\
         %i00001#00008 %e00004#00004
;
0*d1#999 Every day of year: from 1991@dots{}1993 and from 1996\
         except February 1992 and all September\
         %i1991#1993 %i1996# %e19922#19922 %e00009#00009
@end example

@node Inclusive date period, Exclusive date period, Exclusions with date argument, Exclusions with date argument
@appendixsubsubsec Inclusive date period @code{%i@r{[}@var{date}@r{][}#@r{[}@var{date}@r{]]}} special text
@cindex @code{%i@r{[}@var{date}@r{][}#@r{[}@var{date}@r{]]}} special text, inclusive date period
@cindex Special text @code{%i@r{[}@var{date}@r{][}#@r{[}@var{date}@r{]]}}, inclusive date period
@cindex Inclusive date period @code{%i@r{[}@var{date}@r{][}#@r{[}@var{date}@r{]]}} special text

@w{@code{%i@r{[}@var{date}@r{][}#@r{[}@var{date}@r{]]}}}
references an inclusive date period, i.e.@: all dates which are part of the
specified period are valid and are displayed.  Of course this means, that all
fixed dates which are not part of this period (not covered by it) are invalid
and remain undisplayed therefore.

@cindex Fixed date, starting date
@cindex Starting date of fixed date
The first specified date defines the @dfn{starting date} of the fixed date,
i.e.@: the first date the fixed date may occur.  For the starting date, the
following rules concerning definite omission values are valid, elucidated
by using the
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@r{[}@var{mm}@r{[}@var{dd}@r{|}@var{www}@var{n}@r{]]}}}
date format:

@itemize @bullet
@item
If @var{yyyy} is set to @code{0000}, the current year is assumed for the year.

@item
If @var{mm} is not given, then @code{01} (@equiv{}January) is assumed for the
month.

@item
If @var{mm} is set to @code{00}, the current month is assumed for the month,
and the December is assumed in case @var{mm} is set to @code{99}@.

@item
If @w{@var{dd}|@var{www}} is not given, then @code{01} is assumed for the day.

@item
If @var{dd} is set to @code{00}, the current day is assumed for the day,
and the last day of the month @var{mm} is assumed in case @var{dd} is set to
@code{99}@.

@item
If the @var{n} field is given (range @w{@code{1@r{@dots{}}5}} or @code{9}),
then a @var{www} field must also be specified.
@end itemize

@cindex Fixed date, ending date
@cindex Ending date of fixed date
The second specified date defines the @dfn{ending date} of the fixed date,
i.e.@: the last date the fixed date may occur.  For the ending date, the
following rules concerning definite omission values are valid, likewise
elucidated by using the
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@r{[}@var{mm}@r{[}@var{dd}@r{|}@var{www}@var{n}@r{]]}}}
date format:

@itemize @bullet
@item
If @var{yyyy} is set to @code{0000}, the current year is assumed for the year.

@item
If @var{mm} is not given, then @code{12} (@equiv{}December) is assumed for the
month.

@item
If @var{mm} is set to @code{00}, the current month is assumed for the month,
and the December is assumed in case @var{mm} is set to @code{99}@.

@item
If @w{@var{dd}|@var{www}} is not given, the last day of the month @var{mm}
is assumed for the day.

@item
If @var{dd} is set to @code{00}, the current day is assumed for the day,
and the last day of the month @var{mm} is assumed in case @var{dd} is set to
@code{99}@.

@item
If the @var{n} field is given (range @w{@code{1@r{@dots{}}5}} or @code{9}),
then a @var{www} field must also be specified.
@end itemize

The preceding rules are analogously valid for the other permitted date formats.

If the starting date, which is encoded in the @w{@code{%i@r{@dots{}}}} special
text, is later the ending date, the @w{@code{%i@r{@dots{}}}} special text
will be ignored.

In case neither the starting date nor the ending date is specified, means only
@samp{%i} is given, the implicit period 1st January 1@dots{}31st December 9999
@w{(00010101@dots{}99991231)} will be used.

If only the starting date is specified, means either @w{@samp{%i@var{date}}} or
@w{@samp{%i@var{date}#}} is given, the implicit ending date 31st December 9999
@w{(99991231)} will be used.

In case only the ending date is specified, means @w{@samp{%i#@var{date}}} is
given, the implicit starting date 1st January 1 @w{(00010101)} will be used.

For example:

@example
0d*1#999 Every day of year: only April and July\
         %i00004#00004 %i00007#00007
;
0*d1#999 Every day of year: from January@dots{}October\
         %i#000010
;
0*d1#999 Every day of year: from August 1990\
         %i19908
;
0*d1#999 Every day of year: from August@dots{}December\
         %i00008
;
0*d1#999 Every day of year: only today%i0@@t#0@@t
@end example

@node Exclusive date period, , Inclusive date period, Exclusions with date argument
@appendixsubsubsec Exclusive date period @code{%e@r{[}@var{date}@r{][}#@r{[}@var{date}@r{]]}} special text
@cindex @code{%e@r{[}@var{date}@r{][}#@r{[}@var{date}@r{]]}} special text, exclusive date period
@cindex Special text @code{%e@r{[}@var{date}@r{][}#@r{[}@var{date}@r{]]}}, exclusive date period
@cindex Exclusive date period @code{%e@r{[}@var{date}@r{][}#@r{[}@var{date}@r{]]}} special text

@w{@code{%e@r{[}@var{date}@r{][}#@r{[}@var{date}@r{]]}}}
references an exclusive date period, i.e.@: all dates which are part of the
specified period are invalid and remain undisplayed therefore.  Of course
this means, that all fixed dates which are not part of this period
(not covered by it) are valid and are displayed.

@cindex Fixed date, starting date
@cindex Starting date of fixed date
The first specified date defines the starting date of the fixed date,
i.e.@: the first date the fixed date may occur.  For the starting date, the
following rules concerning definite omission values are valid, elucidated
by using the
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@r{[}@var{mm}@r{[}@var{dd}@r{|}@var{www}@var{n}@r{]]}}}
date format:

@itemize @bullet
@item
If @var{yyyy} is set to @code{0000}, the current year is assumed for the year.

@item
If @var{mm} is not given, then @code{01} (@equiv{}January) is assumed for the
month.

@item
If @var{mm} is set to @code{00}, the current month is assumed for the month,
and the December is assumed in case @var{mm} is set to @code{99}@.

@item
If @w{@var{dd}|@var{www}} is not given, then @code{01} is assumed for the day.

@item
If @var{dd} is set to @code{00}, the current day is assumed for the day,
and the last day of the month @var{mm} is assumed in case @var{dd} is set to
@code{99}@.

@item
If the @var{n} field is given (range @w{@code{1@r{@dots{}}5}} or @code{9}),
then a @var{www} field must also be specified.
@end itemize

@cindex Fixed date, ending date
@cindex Ending date of fixed date
The second specified date defines the ending date of the fixed date,
i.e.@: the last date the fixed date may occur.  For the ending date, the
following rules concerning definite omission values are valid, likewise
elucidated by using the
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@r{[}@var{mm}@r{[}@var{dd}@r{|}@var{www}@var{n}@r{]]}}}
date format:

@itemize @bullet
@item
If @var{yyyy} is set to @code{0000}, the current year is assumed for the year.

@item
If @var{mm} is not given, then @code{12} (@equiv{}December) is assumed for the
month.

@item
If @var{mm} is set to @code{00}, the current month is assumed for the month,
and the December is assumed in case @var{mm} is set to @code{99}@.

@item
If @w{@var{dd}|@var{www}} is not given, the last day of the month @var{mm}
is assumed for the day.

@item
If @var{dd} is set to @code{00}, the current day is assumed for the day,
and the last day of the month @var{mm} is assumed in case @var{dd} is set to
@code{99}@.

@item
If the @var{n} field is given (range @w{@code{1@r{@dots{}}5}} or @code{9}),
then a @var{www} field must also be specified.
@end itemize

The preceding rules are analogously valid for the other permitted date formats.

If the starting date, which is encoded in the @w{@code{%e@r{@dots{}}}} special
text, is later the ending date, the @w{@code{%e@r{@dots{}}}} special text
will be ignored.

In case neither the starting date nor the ending date is specified, means only
@samp{%e} is given, the implicit period 1st January 1@dots{}31st December 9999
@w{(00010101@dots{}99991231)} will be used.

If only the starting date is specified, means either @samp{%e@var{date}} or
@samp{%e@var{date}#} is given, the implicit ending date 31st December 9999
@w{(99991231)} will be used.

In case only the ending date is specified, means @samp{%e#@var{date}} is given,
the implicit starting date 1st January 1 @w{(00010101)} will be used.

For example:

@example
0d*1#999 Every day of year: except April and July\
        %e00004#00004 %e00007#00007
;
0*d1#999 Every day of year: except January@dots{}October\
         %e#000010
;
0*d1#999 Every day of year: until July 1990\
         %e19908
;
0*d1#999 Every day of year: except August@dots{}December\
         %e00008
;
0*d1#999 Every day of year: except today%e0@@t#0@@t
@end example

@node Exclusions without any argument, , Exclusions with date argument, Exclusions
@appendixsubsec Exclusions without any argument @code{%@var{?}} special texts
@cindex @code{%@var{?}} special texts, exclusions without any argument
@cindex Special texts @code{%@var{?}}, exclusions without any argument
@cindex Exclusions without any argument @code{%@var{?}} special texts

@menu
* Inclusive day period::
* Exclusive day period::
@end menu

@cindex Inclusive day period
@cindex Period, inclusive day
@cindex Exclusive day period
@cindex Period, exclusive day
First of all, an @dfn{inclusive day} period @code{%@var{?}} special text can
be specified with the effect, that only those fixed dates are respected
and displayed which are part of this period.  And the specification of an
@dfn{exclusive day} period @code{%@var{?}} special text has the effect,
that only those fixed dates are respected and displayed which are not part
of this period.

Cleverly combined, these special texts also offer very effective filtration
capabilities used for the definition of very special periods.

For example:

@example
0*d1#999 Every day of year: all Mondays@dots{}Fridays\
         except Wednesdays and all legal holidays\
         %r%F%V
;
00001001#9999 Every day in last quarter of year: all holidays\
              which are not on a Sunday%x %P
@end example

@node Inclusive day period, Exclusive day period, Exclusions without any argument, Exclusions without any argument
@appendixsubsubsec Inclusive day period @code{%@var{?}} special texts
@cindex @code{%@var{?}} special texts, inclusive day period
@cindex Special texts @code{%@var{?}}, inclusive day period
@cindex Inclusive day period @code{%@var{?}} special texts

The following inclusive day periods @code{%@var{?}} special texts
are respected, at which @emph{inclusive} is meant for the period
which is not excluded.

@table @code
@item %v
@cindex @code{%v} special text, inclusive legal holidays
@cindex Special text @code{%v}, inclusive legal holidays
@cindex Inclusive legal holidays @code{%v} special text
Excludes fixed date in case it is not listed as legal holiday in the
@emph{eternal holiday list}@.

@item %x
@cindex @code{%x} special text, inclusive all holidays
@cindex Special text @code{%x}, inclusive all holidays
@cindex Inclusive all holidays @code{%x} special text
Excludes fixed date in case it is neither listed as legal holiday nor
memorial day in the @emph{eternal holiday list}@.

@item %a
@cindex @code{%a} special text, inclusive Monday
@cindex Special text @code{%a}, inclusive Monday
@cindex Inclusive Monday @code{%a} special text
Excludes fixed date in case it is no Monday.

@item %c
@cindex @code{%c} special text, inclusive Tuesday
@cindex Special text @code{%c}, inclusive Tuesday
@cindex Inclusive Tuesday @code{%c} special text
Excludes fixed date in case it is no Tuesday.

@item %f
@cindex @code{%f} special text, inclusive Wednesday
@cindex Special text @code{%f}, inclusive Wednesday
@cindex Inclusive Wednesday @code{%f} special text
Excludes fixed date in case it is no Wednesday.

@item %g
@cindex @code{%g} special text, inclusive Thursday
@cindex Special text @code{%g}, inclusive Thursday
@cindex Inclusive Thursday @code{%g} special text
Excludes fixed date in case it is no Thursday.

@item %h
@cindex @code{%h} special text, inclusive Friday
@cindex Special text @code{%h}, inclusive Friday
@cindex Inclusive Friday @code{%h} special text
Excludes fixed date in case it is no Friday.

@item %l
@cindex @code{%l} special text, inclusive Saturday
@cindex Special text @code{%l}, inclusive Saturday
@cindex Inclusive Saturday @code{%l} special text
Excludes fixed date in case it is no Saturday.

@item %p
@cindex @code{%p} special text, inclusive Sunday
@cindex Special text @code{%p}, inclusive Sunday
@cindex Inclusive Sunday @code{%p} special text
Excludes fixed date in case it is no Sunday.

@item %q
@cindex @code{%q} special text, inclusive Monday@dots{}Thursday
@cindex Special text @code{%q}, inclusive Monday@dots{}Thursday
@cindex Inclusive Monday@dots{}Thursday @code{%q} special text
Excludes fixed date in case it is no Monday@dots{}Thursday.

@item %r
@cindex @code{%r} special text, inclusive Monday@dots{}Friday
@cindex Special text @code{%r}, inclusive Monday@dots{}Friday
@cindex Inclusive Monday@dots{}Friday @code{%r} special text
Excludes fixed date in case it is no Monday@dots{}Friday.
@end table

@node Exclusive day period, , Inclusive day period, Exclusions without any argument
@appendixsubsubsec Exclusive day period @code{%@var{?}} special texts
@cindex @code{%@var{?}} special texts, exclusive day period
@cindex Special texts @code{%@var{?}}, exclusive day period
@cindex Exclusive day period @code{%@var{?}} special texts

The following exclusive day periods @code{%@var{?}} special texts
are respected, at which @emph{exclusive} is meant for the period
which is excluded.

@table @code
@item %V
@cindex @code{%V} special text, exclusive legal holidays
@cindex Special text @code{%V}, exclusive legal holidays
@cindex Exclusive legal holidays @code{%V} special text
Excludes fixed date in case it is listed as legal holiday in the
@emph{eternal holiday list}@.

@item %X
@cindex @code{%X} special text, exclusive all holidays
@cindex Special text @code{%X}, exclusive all holidays
@cindex Exclusive all holidays @code{%X} special text
Excludes fixed date in case it is either listed as legal holiday or
memorial day in the @emph{eternal holiday list}@.

@item %A
@cindex @code{%A} special text, exclusive Monday
@cindex Special text @code{%A}, exclusive Monday
@cindex Exclusive Monday @code{%A} special text
Excludes fixed date in case it is a Monday.

@item %C
@cindex @code{%C} special text, exclusive Tuesday
@cindex Special text @code{%C}, exclusive Tuesday
@cindex Exclusive Tuesday @code{%C} special text
Excludes fixed date in case it is a Tuesday.

@item %F
@cindex @code{%F} special text, exclusive Wednesday
@cindex Special text @code{%F}, exclusive Wednesday
@cindex Exclusive Wednesday @code{%F} special text
Excludes fixed date in case it is a Wednesday.

@item %G
@cindex @code{%G} special text, exclusive Thursday
@cindex Special text @code{%G}, exclusive Thursday
@cindex Exclusive Thursday @code{%G} special text
Excludes fixed date in case it is a Thursday.

@item %H
@cindex @code{%H} special text, exclusive Friday
@cindex Special text @code{%H}, exclusive Friday
@cindex Exclusive Friday @code{%H} special text
Excludes fixed date in case it is a Friday.

@item %L
@cindex @code{%L} special text, exclusive Saturday
@cindex Special text @code{%L}, exclusive Saturday
@cindex Exclusive Saturday @code{%L} special text
Excludes fixed date in case it is a Saturday.

@item %P
@cindex @code{%P} special text, exclusive Sunday
@cindex Special text @code{%P}, exclusive Sunday
@cindex Exclusive Sunday @code{%P} special text
Excludes fixed date in case it is a Sunday.

@item %Q
@cindex @code{%Q} special text, exclusive Monday@dots{}Thursday
@cindex Special text @code{%Q}, exclusive Monday@dots{}Thursday
@cindex Exclusive Monday@dots{}Thursday @code{%Q} special text
Excludes fixed date in case it is a Monday@dots{}Thursday.

@item %R
@cindex @code{%R} special text, exclusive Monday@dots{}Friday
@cindex Special text @code{%R}, exclusive Monday@dots{}Friday
@cindex Exclusive Monday@dots{}Friday @code{%R} special text
Excludes fixed date in case it is a Monday@dots{}Friday.
@end table

@node Replacements, Shell Command, Exclusions, Special Texts
@appendixsec @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} special texts for text replacement
@cindex @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} special texts, text replacement
@cindex Special texts @code{%@var{?}}@dots{}, text replacement
@cindex Text replacement @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} special texts

@menu
* Replacements with date argument::
* Replacements with other argument::
* Replacements without any argument::
@end menu

@code{%@var{?}}@dots{} special texts which are replaced by particular texts
at program run-time causes the interspersing of data into the fixed date text,
which quality is essentially depending on the command line arguments given
for running the program.  The complete special text is always replaced
accordingly in output if the fixed date text must be displayed.

Cleverly combined, these special texts also offer very effective mechanisms
used for the definition of particular texts in a highly flexible manner,
for example:

@example
0*d1#999 Every day of year: Today is %K, the %n (%N)
@end example

@node Replacements with date argument, Replacements with other argument, Replacements, Replacements
@appendixsubsec Replacements with date argument @code{%@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special texts
@cindex @code{%@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special texts, replacements with date argument
@cindex Special texts @code{%@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, replacements with date argument
@cindex Replacements with date argument @code{%@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special texts

@menu
* Weekday name::
* Weekday number::
* Day-of-year number::
* Day number::
* Week number::
* Month name::
* Month number::
* Year number::
* Moon phase::
* Biorhythm::
* Difference value::
@end menu

Apart from different representations of a weekday name, it is possible
to create its weekday number.  Likewise, the current day-of-year number,
the day number, the week number, the month name, the month number, the year
number, the Moon phase, the biorhythm, and some useful difference values
can be produced.

For the @var{date} argument these @code{%@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}
special text may have, the following rules concerning definite omission
values are valid, elucidated by using the
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@r{[}@var{mm}@r{[}@var{dd}@r{|}@var{www}@var{n}@r{]]}}}
date format@footnote{The succeeding rules are analogously valid for the
other permitted date formats.}:

@itemize @bullet
@item
If @var{yyyy}@dots{} is not given (@equiv{}@strong{no} date encoded),
the current year is assumed for the date.

@item
If @var{yyyy} is set to @code{0000}, the current year is assumed for the year.

@item
If @var{mm} is not given or set to @code{00}, the current month is assumed for
the month, and the December is assumed in case @var{mm} is set to @code{99}@.

@item
If @w{@var{dd}|@var{www}} is not given or set to @code{00}, the current day is
assumed for the day, and the last day of the month is assumed in case
@var{dd} is set to @code{99}@.

@item
If the @var{n} field is given (range @w{@code{1@r{@dots{}}5}} or @code{9}),
then a @var{www} field must also be specified.
@end itemize

@node Weekday name, Weekday number, Replacements with date argument, Replacements with date argument
@appendixsubsubsec Weekday name @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}K@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
@cindex @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}K@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, weekday name
@cindex Special text @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}K@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, weekday name
@cindex Weekday name @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}K@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text

@table @code
@item %K@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%K@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, complete weekday name
@cindex Special text @code{%K@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, complete weekday name
@cindex Complete weekday name @code{%K@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the complete @strong{weekday name} of the current day, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Today is %K , the %n}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Today is Monday, the 10-Jun-1996}},
in case the actual system date is the 10th June 1996@.
@end quotation

@item %>3#K@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%>3#K@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, 3-letter weekday name
@cindex Special text @code{%>3#K@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, 3-letter weekday name
@cindex 3-letter weekday name @code{%>3#K@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the 3-letter @strong{weekday name} of the current day, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Today is %>3#K0@@t+1 , the %n+1}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Today is Tue, the 11-Jun-1996}},
in case the actual system date is the 10th June 1996@.
@end quotation

@item %>2#K@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%>2#K@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, 2-letter weekday name
@cindex Special text @code{%>2#K@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, 2-letter weekday name
@cindex 2-letter weekday name @code{%>2#K@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the 2-letter @strong{weekday name} of the current day, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Today is %>2#K , the %n}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Today is Mo, the 10-Jun-1996}},
in case the actual system date is the 10th June 1996@.
@end quotation
@end table

@node Weekday number, Day-of-year number, Weekday name, Replacements with date argument
@appendixsubsubsec Weekday number @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special texts
@cindex @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special texts, weekday number
@cindex Special texts @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, weekday number
@cindex Weekday number @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special texts

The following weekday number
@code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}
special texts are respected, e.g.@::

@table @code
@item %W@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%W@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, weekday number
@cindex Special text @code{%W@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, weekday number
@cindex Weekday number @code{%W@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the @strong{weekday number} of the current day, and which is
determined by the @cite{Monday@equiv{}1@dots{}Sunday@equiv{}7} counting
method, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Today is weekday %W , the %n}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Today is weekday 1, the 10-Jun-1996}},
in case the actual system date is the 10th June 1996@.
@end quotation

@item %>1&*W@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%>1&*W@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, weekday number
@cindex Special text @code{%>1&*W@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, weekday number
@cindex Weekday number @code{%>1&*W@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the @strong{weekday number} with trailing Ordinal Number suffix
of the current day, and which is determined by the
@cite{Monday@equiv{}1@dots{}Sunday@equiv{}7} counting method, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Today is weekday %>1&*W0@@t+1 , the %n+1}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Today is weekday 2nd, the 11-Jun-1996}},
in case the actual system date is the 10th June 1996@.
@end quotation

@item %E@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%E@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, weekday number
@cindex Special text @code{%E@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, weekday number
@cindex Weekday number @code{%E@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the @strong{weekday number} of the current day, and which is
determined by the @cite{Monday@equiv{}0@dots{}Sunday@equiv{}6}
counting method, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Today is weekday %E , the %n}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Today is weekday 0, the 10-Jun-1996}},
in case the actual system date is the 10th June 1996@.
@end quotation

@item %>1&*E@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%>1&*E@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, weekday number
@cindex Special text @code{%>1&*E@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, weekday number
@cindex Weekday number @code{%>1&*E@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the @strong{weekday number} with trailing Ordinal Number suffix
of the current day, and which is determined by the
@cite{Monday@equiv{}0@dots{}Sunday@equiv{}6} counting method, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Today is weekday %>1&*E , the %n}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Today is weekday 0th, the 10-Jun-1996}},
in case the actual system date is the 10th June 1996@.
@end quotation

@item %I@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%I@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, weekday number
@cindex Special text @code{%I@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, weekday number
@cindex Weekday number @code{%I@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the @strong{weekday number} of the current day, and which is
determined by the @cite{Sunday@equiv{}1@dots{}Saturday@equiv{}7} counting
method, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Today is weekday %I , the %n}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Today is weekday 2, the 10-Jun-1996}},
in case the actual system date is the 10th June 1996@.
@end quotation

@item %>1&*I@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%>1&*I@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, weekday number
@cindex Special text @code{%>1&*I@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, weekday number
@cindex Weekday number @code{%>1&*I@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the @strong{weekday number} with trailing Ordinal Number suffix
of the current day, and which is determined by the
@cite{Sunday@equiv{}1@dots{}Saturday@equiv{}7} counting method, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Today is weekday %>1&*I , the %n}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Today is weekday 2nd, the 10-Jun-1996}},
in case the actual system date is the 10th June 1996@.
@end quotation

@item %J@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%J@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, weekday number
@cindex Special text @code{%J@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, weekday number
@cindex Weekday number @code{%J@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the @strong{weekday number} of the current day, and which is
determined by the @cite{Sunday@equiv{}0@dots{}Saturday@equiv{}6} counting
method, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Today is weekday %J , the %n}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Today is weekday 1, the 10-Jun-1996}},
in case the actual system date is the 10th June 1996@.
@end quotation

@item %>1&*J@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%>1&*J@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, weekday number
@cindex Special text @code{%>1&*J@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, weekday number
@cindex Weekday number @code{%>1&*J@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the @strong{weekday number} with trailing Ordinal Number suffix
of the current day, and which is determined by the
@cite{Sunday@equiv{}0@dots{}Saturday@equiv{}6} counting method, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Today is weekday %>1&*J , the %n}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Today is weekday 1st, the 10-Jun-1996}},
in case the actual system date is the 10th June 1996@.
@end quotation

@item %S@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%S@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, weekday number
@cindex Special text @code{%S@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, weekday number
@cindex Weekday number @code{%S@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the @strong{weekday number} of the current day, and which is
determined by the
@cite{@var{starting day of week}@equiv{}1@dots{}@var{ending day of week}@equiv{}7}
counting method
(@pxref{x-starting-day, , Calendar option @option{--starting-day=@var{argument}}}),
e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Today is weekday %S , the %n}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Today is weekday 4, the 10-Jun-1996}},
in case the actual system date is the 10th June 1996 and Friday (@equiv{}5)
is the starting day of week.
@end quotation

@item %>1&*S@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%>1&*S@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, weekday number
@cindex Special text @code{%>1&*S@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, weekday number
@cindex Weekday number @code{%>1&*S@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the @strong{weekday number} with trailing Ordinal Number suffix
of the current day, and which is determined by the
@cite{@var{starting day of week}@equiv{}1@dots{}@var{ending day of week}@equiv{}7}
counting method
(@pxref{x-starting-day, , Calendar option @option{--starting-day=@var{argument}}}),
e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Today is weekday %>1&*S , the %n}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Today is weekday 4th, the 10-Jun-1996}},
in case the actual system date is the 10th June 1996 and Friday (@equiv{}5)
is the starting day of week.
@end quotation

@item %T@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%T@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, weekday number
@cindex Special text @code{%T@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, weekday number
@cindex Weekday number @code{%T@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the @strong{weekday number} of the current day, and which is
determined by the
@cite{@var{starting day of week}@equiv{}0@dots{}@var{ending day of week}@equiv{}6}
counting method
(@pxref{x-starting-day, , Calendar option @option{--starting-day=@var{argument}}}),
e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Today is weekday %T , the %n}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Today is weekday 3, the 10-Jun-1996}},
in case the actual system date is the 10th June 1996 and Friday (@equiv{}5)
is the starting day of week.
@end quotation

@need 2000
@item %>1&*T@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%>1&*T@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, weekday number
@cindex Special text @code{%>1&*T@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, weekday number
@cindex Weekday number @code{%>1&*T@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the @strong{weekday number} with trailing Ordinal Number suffix
of the current day, and which is determined by the
@cite{@var{starting day of week}@equiv{}0@dots{}@var{ending day of week}@equiv{}6}
counting method
(@pxref{x-starting-day, , Calendar option @option{--starting-day=@var{argument}}}),
e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Today is weekday %>1&*T , the %n}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Today is weekday 3rd, the 10-Jun-1996}},
in case the actual system date is the 10th June 1996 and Friday (@equiv{}5)
is the starting day of week.
@end quotation
@end table

@node Day-of-year number, Day number, Weekday number, Replacements with date argument
@appendixsubsubsec Day-of-year number @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}N@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
@cindex @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}N@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, day-of-year number
@cindex Special text @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}N@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, day-of-year number
@cindex Day-of-year number @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}N@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text

@table @code
@item %N@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%N@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, day-of-year number
@cindex Special text @code{%N@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, day-of-year number
@cindex Day-of-year number @code{%N@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the @strong{day-of-year number} of the current day of year,
e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Day %N @ of year, the %n}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Day 53 of year, the 22-Feb-1996}},
in case the actual system date is the 22nd February 1996@.
@end quotation

@item %>03*N@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%>03*N@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, day-of-year number
@cindex Special text @code{%>03*N@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, day-of-year number
@cindex Day-of-year number @code{%>03*N@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the 3-digit @strong{day-of-year number} with leading zeroes
of the current day of year, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Day %>03*N0@@t-1 @ of year, the %n-1}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Day 052 of year, the 21-Feb-1996}},
in case the actual system date is the 22nd February 1996@.
@end quotation

@item %>1&*N@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%>1&*N@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, day-of-year number
@cindex Special text @code{%>1&*N@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, day-of-year number
@cindex Day-of-year number @code{%>1&*N@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the @strong{day-of-year number} with trailing Ordinal Number
suffix of the current day of year, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Day %>1&*N @ of year, the %n}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Day 53rd of year, the 22-Feb-1996}},
in case the actual system date is the 22nd February 1996@.
@end quotation

@item %>03&*N@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%>03&*N@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, day-of-year number
@cindex Special text @code{%>03&*N@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, day-of-year number
@cindex Day-of-year number @code{%>03&*N@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the 3-digit @strong{day-of-year number} with leading zeroes
and trailing Ordinal Number suffix of the current day of year, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Day %>03&*N @ of year, the %n}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Day 053rd of year, the 22-Feb-1996}},
in case the actual system date is the 22nd February 1996@.
@end quotation
@end table

@node Day number, Week number, Day-of-year number, Replacements with date argument
@appendixsubsubsec Day number @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}D@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
@cindex @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}D@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, day number
@cindex Special text @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}D@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, day number
@cindex Day number @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}D@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text

@table @code
@item %D@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%D@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, day number
@cindex Special text @code{%D@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, day number
@cindex Day number @code{%D@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the @strong{day number} of the current day of month, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Day %D , %n}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Day 2, 02-Feb-1996}},
in case the actual system date is the 2nd February 1996@.
@end quotation

@need 2000
@item %>02*D@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%>02*D@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, day number
@cindex Special text @code{%>02*D@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, day number
@cindex Day number @code{%>02*D@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the 2-digit @strong{day number} with leading zero of the
current day of month, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Day %>02*D0@@t-1 , %n-1}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Day 01, 01-Feb-1996}},
in case the actual system date is the 2nd February 1996@.
@end quotation

@item %>1&*D@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%>1&*D@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, day number
@cindex Special text @code{%>1&*D@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, day number
@cindex Day number @code{%>1&*D@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the @strong{day number} with trailing Ordinal Number suffix
of the current day of month, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Day %>1&*D , %n}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Day 2nd, 02-Feb-1996}},
in case the actual system date is the 2nd February 1996@.
@end quotation

@item %>02&*D@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%>02&*D@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, day number
@cindex Special text @code{%>02&*D@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, day number
@cindex Day number @code{%>02&*D@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the 2-digit @strong{day number} with leading zero and trailing
Ordinal Number suffix of the current day of month, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Day %>02&*D , %n}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Day 02nd, 02-Feb-1996}},
in case the actual system date is the 2nd February 1996@.
@end quotation
@end table

@node Week number, Month name, Day number, Replacements with date argument
@appendixsubsubsec Week number @code{%k@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
@cindex @code{%k@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, week number
@cindex Special text @code{%k@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, week number
@cindex Week number @code{%k@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text

@table @code
@item %k@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @acronym{ISO}-8601:1988 week number
@cindex Week number, @acronym{ISO}-8601:1988
@cindex Standard week number
@cindex Week number, standard
Is replaced by either the 2-digit @strong{@acronym{ISO} week number} or the
@strong{standard week number} with leading zero, or a 4-alphanumeric character
text of the current week of year@*
(see
@ref{x-starting-day, , Calendar option @option{--starting-day=@var{argument}}},
@ref{x-iso-week-number, , Calendar option @option{--iso-week-number=yes@r{|}no}},
and
@ref{Internationalization, , Aspects in Internationalization},
for further details), e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Today is %K @ of week %k}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Today is Monday of week 24}},
in case the actual system date is the 10th June 1996@.
@end quotation
@end table

@node Month name, Month number, Week number, Replacements with date argument
@appendixsubsubsec Month name @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}U@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
@cindex @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}U@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, month name
@cindex Special text @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}U@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, month name
@cindex Month name @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}U@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text

@table @code
@item %U@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%U@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, complete month name
@cindex Special text @code{%U@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, complete month name
@cindex Complete month name @code{%U@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the complete @strong{month name} of the current month of year,
e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Today is %U , %n}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Today is June, 10-Jun-1996}},
in case the actual system date is the 10th June 1996@.
@end quotation

@item %>3#U@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%>3#U@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, 3-letter month name
@cindex Special text @code{%>3#U@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, 3-letter month name
@cindex 3-letter month name @code{%>3#U@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the 3-letter @strong{month name} of the current month of year,
e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Today is %>3#U19961010 , %n}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Today is Oct, 10-Jun-1996}},
in case the actual system date is the 10th June 1996@.
@end quotation
@end table

@node Month number, Year number, Month name, Replacements with date argument
@appendixsubsubsec Month number @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}M@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
@cindex @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}M@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, month number
@cindex Special text @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}M@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, month number
@cindex Month number @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}M@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text

@table @code
@item %M@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%M@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, month number
@cindex Special text @code{%M@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, month number
@cindex Month number @code{%M@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the @strong{month number} of the current month of year, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Month %M , %n}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Month 2, 22-Feb-1996}},
in case the actual system date is the 22nd February 1996@.
@end quotation

@item %>02*M@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%>02*M@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, month number
@cindex Special text @code{%>02*M@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, month number
@cindex Month number @code{%>02*M@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the 2-digit @strong{month number} with leading zero
of the current month of year, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Month %>02*M000001 , %n}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Month 01, 22-Feb-1996}},
in case the actual system date is the 22nd February 1996@.
@end quotation

@item %>1&*M@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%>1&*M@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, month number
@cindex Special text @code{%>1&*M@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, month number
@cindex Month number @code{%>1&*M@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the @strong{month number} with trailing Ordinal Number suffix
of the current month of year, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Month %>1&*M , %n}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Month 2nd, 22-Feb-1996}},
in case the actual system date is the 22nd February 1996@.
@end quotation

@item %>02&*M@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%>02&*M@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, month number
@cindex Special text @code{%>02&*M@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, month number
@cindex Month number @code{%>02&*M@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the 2-digit @strong{month number} with leading zero and trailing
Ordinal Number suffix of the current month of year, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Month %>02&*M , %n}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Month 02nd, 22-Feb-1996}},
in case the actual system date is the 22nd February 1996@.
@end quotation
@end table

@node Year number, Moon phase, Month number, Replacements with date argument
@appendixsubsubsec Year number @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}Y@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
@cindex @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}Y@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, year number
@cindex Special text @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}Y@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, year number
@cindex Year number @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}Y@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text

@table @code
@item %Y@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%Y@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, year number
@cindex Special text @code{%Y@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, year number
@cindex Year number @code{%Y@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the @strong{year number} of the current year, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Year %Y , %n}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Year 933, 22-Feb-0933}},
in case the actual system date is the 22nd February 933@.
@end quotation

@item %>04*Y@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%>04*Y@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, year number
@cindex Special text @code{%>04*Y@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, year number
@cindex Year number @code{%>04*Y@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the 4-digit @strong{complete year number} with leading zeroes
of the current year, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Year %>04*Y0015 , %n}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Year 0015, 22-Feb-0933}},
in case the actual system date is the 22nd February 933@.
@end quotation
@end table

@node Moon phase, Biorhythm, Year number, Replacements with date argument
@appendixsubsubsec Moon phase @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special texts
@cindex @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special texts, Moon phase
@cindex Special texts @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, Moon phase
@cindex Moon phase @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special texts

@cindex Universal time (UTC)
@cindex Greenwich Mean time (GMT)
Gcal uses a very simple algorithm for detecting the Moon phase, which computes
approximate values only.  The Moon phase is always calculated for 0 @w{o'clock}
Universal time @w{(UTC/GMT)}@.
@xref{x-time-offset, , Calendar option @option{--time-offset=@var{argument}}},
how to change the base time for which the astronomical functions
are calculated.  The following Moon phase
@code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special texts
are respected:

@need 800
@table @code
@item %O@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%O@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, Moon phase text
@cindex Special text @code{%O@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, Moon phase text
@cindex Moon phase text @code{%O@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the @strong{Moon phase text} of the current day of year, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Moon phase %O , %n}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Moon phase 94%+, 22-Dec-1996}},
in case the actual system date is the 22nd December 1996@.
@end quotation

The constructed Moon phase text consists of a percent value, which informs
about the illuminated fraction of the Moon's disk, and a trailing sign that
tells something about the state of the Moon.  A trailing @samp{+} sign
indicates a waxing Moon, a @samp{-} sign a waning Moon, a @samp{@@} sign
indicates the Full Moon phase, and a @samp{!} sign the New Moon phase.

@item %>03*O@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%>03*O@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, Moon phase text
@cindex Special text @code{%>03*O@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, Moon phase text
@cindex Moon phase text @code{%>03*O@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the 3-digit @strong{Moon phase text} with leading zeroes
of the current day of year, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Moon phase %>03*O0@@t+1 , %n+1}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Moon phase 098%+, 23-Dec-1996}},
in case the actual system date is the 22nd December 1996@.
@end quotation

The constructed Moon phase text consists of a percent value, which informs
about the illuminated fraction of the Moon's disk, and a trailing sign that
tells something about the state of the Moon.  A trailing @samp{+} sign
indicates a waxing Moon, a @samp{-} sign a waning Moon, a @samp{@@} sign
indicates the Full Moon phase, and a @samp{!} sign the New Moon phase.

@item %Z@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%Z@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, Moon phase text graphics
@cindex Special text @code{%Z@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, Moon phase text graphics
@cindex Moon phase text graphics @code{%Z@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the @strong{Moon phase text graphics} of the current day of year,
e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Date %n %Z @ --- Moon phase %>03*O ~Text}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Date 08-Mar-1995 }}@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ ( @ @ @ @ @ @ @@@@@@@@@@@@}}@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{ @ @ @ @ @ ( @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@}}@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{ @ @ @ ( @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@}}@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{ @ ( @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@}}@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{ ( @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@}}@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{( @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@}}@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{( @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@}}@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{ ( @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@}}@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{ @ ( @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@}}@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{ @ @ ( @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@}}@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{ @ @ @ @ @ ( @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@@}}@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ ( @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @@@@@@@@@@@@@@ --- Moon phase 041%+}}@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Text}},
in case the actual system date is the 8th March 1995@.
@end quotation

@xref{x-moonimage-lines, , Fixed date option @option{--moonimage-lines=@var{number}}},
how to change the size of a Moon phase text graphics.

A possibly specified @var{format} within this special text is ignored by Gcal.
@end table

@need 1500
@node Biorhythm, Difference value, Moon phase, Replacements with date argument
@appendixsubsubsec Biorhythm @code{%@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special texts
@cindex @code{%@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special texts, biorhythm
@cindex Special texts @code{%@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, biorhythm
@cindex Biorhythm @code{%@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special texts

Gcal is able to create a @dfn{biorhythm} for any specified date of birth.
The created text shows the three standard biorhythm cycles, and that are the
28 day emotional cycle, the 33 day intellectual cycle, and the 23 day physical
cycle.  The emotional cycle governs sensibility, nerves, moodiness, and
creative ability.  The intellectual cycle reflects intelligence, memory,
mental alertness, and reasoning power.  The physical cycle represents physical
strength, endurance, energy and resistance.  All cycles start in the zero point
at the date of birth and swing like sine curves between their positive and
negative maximum values.  The periods above the zero point show the days of
full vitality and efficiency while the periods below the zero point indicate
days of reduced efficiency.  The biorhythm is implemented for entertaining
purposes only!  It is up to the user to interpret the biorhythm texts.

@cindex Biorhythm, critical day
@cindex Critical day, biorhythm
@cindex Biorhythm, positive day
@cindex Positive day, biorhythm
@cindex Biorhythm, negative day
@cindex Negative day, biorhythm
Gcal counts @dfn{critical} days, @dfn{positive} likewise @dfn{negative} days.
Critical days are those days in which one or more of the biological cycles
crosses the zero point.  At that time, one's system is said to be in a state
of flux and it may be desirable to exhibit caution.
Positive days are those days in which one or more of the biological cycles have
a positive maximum value.  At that time, one's system is said to be in a raised
state.
Negative days are those days in which one or more of the biological cycles have
a negative maximum value.  At that time, one's system is said to be in a lessen
state.

The following biorhythm @code{%@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special texts
are respected:

@table @code
@item %,@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%,@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, biorhythm text
@cindex Special text @code{%,@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, biorhythm text
@cindex Biorhythm text @code{%,@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the @strong{biorhythm text} of the current day of year, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{%,19620921}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{1! 0+ 0- , Emo=+022%- Int=-091%+ Phy=-014%-}},
in case the actual system date is the 12th December 1996@.
@end quotation

The preceding example shows the calculated biorhythm expressed as a series
of values for a person born in 1962, September 21st.  The constructed text
consists of two parts, and that is on the one hand a triplet of total values
which indicate the critical, positive and negative day.  And on the other
hand a triplet of values which indicate the emotional, intellectual and
physical cycle.

In the first triplet of total values, a @samp{!} suffix means a
critical day, a @samp{+} indicates a positive day, and a @samp{-}
suffix marks a negative day.

In the second triplet of values, each single cycle percent value consists of
a leading positive or negative sign that tells something about the distance
of this value to the zero point, and a trailing character that tells something
about the state of each cycle.  A trailing @samp{+} character marks a waxing
phase, a @samp{-} suffix means a waning phase, and a @samp{@@} indicates the
maximum value of a phase.

@item %;@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%;@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, biorhythm text graphics
@cindex Special text @code{%;@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, biorhythm text graphics
@cindex Biorhythm text graphics @code{%;@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Is replaced by the @strong{biorhythm text graphics} of the current day of year,
e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{%;19620921}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{0- @ I @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ P 1 @ @ E @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ +0}},
in case the actual system date is the 12th December 1996@.
@end quotation

The preceding example shows the calculated biorhythm expressed as a text
graphics line for a person born in 1962, September 21st.  The constructed
line is a bar with a negative and positive axis of adjustable length
(@pxref{x-biorhythm-axis, , Fixed date option @option{--biorhythm-axis=@var{number}}}),
which left margin is represented by the total value of the negative days (the
@samp{0-} in this case), and which right margin is represented by the total
value of the positive days (the @samp{+0} in this case)@.  The zero point of
the co-ordinate is represented by the total value of the critical days, which
is the @samp{1} in this case.  The emotional, intellectual and the physical
phase value is accordingly placed in scaled manner on this bar, and that by
using the initial letter of the cycle in each case (@samp{E}, @samp{I} and
@samp{P})@.  Coincidental phase values are marked by a @samp{@@} character.
@end table

@node Difference value, , Biorhythm, Replacements with date argument
@appendixsubsubsec Difference value @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special texts
@cindex @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special texts, difference value
@cindex Special texts @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, difference value
@cindex Difference value @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special texts

The following difference value @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}
special texts are respected:

@table @code
@item %y@var{date}
@cindex @code{%y@var{date}} special text, relative year number
@cindex Special text @code{%y@var{date}}, relative year number
@cindex Relative year number @code{%y@var{date}} special text
@cindex Year difference value
Is replaced by a @strong{year difference value}, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Sylvester 1912 is %y1912 @ years ago}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Sylvester 1912 is -82 years ago}},
in case the year of the actual system date is 1994@.
@end quotation

@item %B@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%B@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, age value
@cindex Special text @code{%B@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, age value
@cindex Age value @code{%B@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
@cindex Birthday
@anchor{x-Age-value}
Is replaced by an @strong{age value}, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{My %B1962 @ birthday%i1952#2062}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{My 32 birthday}},
in case the year of the actual system date is 1994@.
@end quotation

Those age values are only displayed, if the computation of an age
value is greater zero.  The fixed date warning in preceding example
is displayed only in case the current year is greater than 1952 and less
than 2062@.

@item %>1&*B@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%>1&*B@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text, age value
@cindex Special text @code{%>1&*B@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}, age value
@cindex Age value @code{%>1&*B@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
@cindex Birthday
Is replaced by an @strong{age value} with trailing Ordinal Number suffix,
e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{My %>1&*B1962 @ birthday%i1952#2062}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{My 32nd birthday}},
in case the year of the actual system date is 1994@.
@end quotation

Those age values are only displayed, if the computation of an age
value is greater zero.  The fixed date warning in preceding example
is displayed only in case the current year is greater than 1952 and less
than 2062@.
@end table

@node Replacements with other argument, Replacements without any argument, Replacements with date argument, Replacements
@appendixsubsec Replacements with other argument @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special texts
@cindex @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special texts, replacements with other argument
@cindex Special texts @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}}, replacements with other argument
@cindex Replacements with other argument @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special texts

@menu
* Actual clocktime::
* Textual date::
* Julian day number::
* Geographical distance and course angle::
* Sun data::
* Moon data::
* Contents of Environment variable::
@end menu

Apart from different representations of the actual system time, a fixed format
date text can be created.  Moreover, it is possible to produce a day number,
which bears the Julian date as base date and which can be deferred if needed.
Furthermore, the approximate distance and the course angle between two
geographic point locations, and different Sun and Moon oriented data and times
for at pleasure any geographical location can be created.  It is also possible
to display the contents of environment variables in the fixed date text.

For the @var{argument} these @code{%@var{?}@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}}
special texts may have, no special rules concerning definite omission
values are valid.

@node Actual clocktime, Textual date, Replacements with other argument, Replacements with other argument
@appendixsubsubsec Actual clocktime @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special texts
@cindex @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special texts, actual clocktime
@cindex Special texts @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}}, actual clocktime
@cindex Actual clocktime @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special texts

@cindex Universal time (UTC)
@cindex Greenwich Mean time (GMT)
Gcal is able to represent the actual clocktime as local/zone time
and as Universal time @w{(UTC/GMT)}, and additionally the
@acronym{RFC}-822@footnote{@acronym{RFC} is the abbreviation of
@cite{Request for Comments}@.} style numerical Universal time timezone offset
value and the actual numerical local time timezone offset value.
@xref{x-Actual-local-time, Actual local time @code{%t@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text, Actual local time in @code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}} format @code{%t@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text},
for the detailed description of all components of the @var{argument},
which may trail the actual clocktime
@w{@code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}}}
special texts.  All actual clocktime
@w{@code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}}}
special texts @strong{must} always be trailed by a @emph{whitespace}
character which is removed in output!  The following actual clocktime
@w{@code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}}}
special texts are respected:

@table @code
@item %t@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%t@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text, actual local time in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} format
@cindex Special text @code{%t@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}}, actual local time in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} format
@cindex Actual local time in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} format @code{%t@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text
@cindex Local time in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} format, display

@code{%t@r{[}*@r{][[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}}
references the @strong{actual local time}, which is displayed by using
the @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} output format, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Local time: %t @ --> Dentist at 10:00}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Local time: 07:32 --> Dentist at 10:00}},
in case the actual local time value is @w{07:32 o'clock}
@w{(@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}})}@.
@end quotation

@cindex @code{%t*} special text
@cindex Time, 12-hours display format
@cindex 12-hours display format of time
@cindex Time, 24-hours display format
@cindex 24-hours display format of time
If only @code{%t} is specified, the local time value will implicitly be
displayed by using the @emph{24-hours} format.  For displaying using the
@emph{12-hours} format, add a @samp{*} character directly behind @code{%t},
e.g.@: @samp{%t*}@.

@anchor{x-Actual-local-time}
A displacement value may trail the @code{%t} special text, which has to
be specified either by using the @w{@code{@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}}}
format or the @w{@code{@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]}}}
format.  @w{@code{@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}}} adds respectively subtracts
the specified amount of minutes @var{mmmm} from the local time value
(range @w{@code{0@r{@dots{}}9999}}), while
@w{@code{@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]}}} adds respectively
subtracts the given amount of hours @var{hh} (range @w{@code{0@r{@dots{}}99}})
and minutes @var{mm} (range @w{@code{0@r{@dots{}}59}}) from the local time
value.  The displacement value is always added to the local time value in
case it is specified without a @w{@code{+@r{|}-}} sign.  In case Gcal is
unable to compute the actual local time in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} format
by reason of a misspecified @var{argument}, a @w{@code{??:??}} text will
be created instead of the actual local time in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}}
format.

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Local time: %t-3: @ --> Dentist at 10:00}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Local time: 04:32 --> Dentist at 10:00}},
in case the actual local time value is @w{07:32 o'clock}
@w{(@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}})}@.
@end quotation

@item %@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}'@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}'@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text, actual local time in @w{@var{m}@r{[}@var{m}@r{@dots{}]}} format
@cindex Special text @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}'@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}}, actual local time in @w{@var{m}@r{[}@var{m}@r{@dots{}]}} format
@cindex Actual local time in @w{@var{m}@r{[}@var{m}@r{@dots{}]}} format @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}'@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text
@cindex Local time in @w{@var{m}@r{[}@var{m}@r{@dots{}]}} format, display

@code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}'@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}}
references the @strong{actual local time in minutes since midnight}, which is
displayed by using the @w{@var{m}@r{[}@var{m}@r{@dots{}]}} output format, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Local time: %' @ --> Dentist at 10:00}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Local time: 452 --> Dentist at 10:00}},
in case the actual local time value is @w{07:32 o'clock}
@w{(@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}})}@.
@end quotation

In case Gcal is unable to compute the actual local time in
@w{@var{m}@r{[}@var{m}@r{@dots{}]}} format by reason of a misspecified
@var{argument}, a @code{??} text will be created instead of the actual
local time in @w{@var{m}@r{[}@var{m}@r{@dots{}]}} format.

@item %@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}_@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}_@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text, actual local time hour
@cindex Special text @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}_@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}}, actual local time hour
@cindex Actual local time hour @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}_@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text
@cindex Local time hour, display

@code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}_@r{[}*@r{][[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}}
references the @strong{actual local time hour}, which is displayed by using
the @w{@var{h}@r{[}@var{h}@r{@dots{}]}} output format, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Local time hour: %_-1:}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Local time hour: 6}}
in case the actual local time value is @w{07:32 o'clock}
@w{(@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}})}@.
@end quotation

In case Gcal is unable to compute the actual local time hour by reason
of a misspecified @var{argument}, a @code{??} text will be created
instead of the actual local time hour @w{@var{h}@r{[}@var{h}@r{@dots{}]}}@.

@item %@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}?@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}?@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text, actual local time minute
@cindex Special text @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}?@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}}, actual local time minute
@cindex Actual local time minute @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}?@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text
@cindex Local time minute, display

@code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}?@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}}
references the @strong{actual local time minute}, which is displayed by using
the @w{@var{m}@r{[}@var{m}@r{@dots{}]}} output format, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Local time minute: %>04*?+:2}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Local time minute: 0034}}
in case the actual local time value is @w{07:32 o'clock}
@w{(@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}})}@.
@end quotation

In case Gcal is unable to compute the actual local time minute by reason
of a misspecified @var{argument}, a @code{??} text will be created
instead of the actual local time minute @w{@var{m}@r{[}@var{m}@r{@dots{}]}}@.

@item %@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@{@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@{@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text, actual local time 12-hour format suffix
@cindex Special text @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@{@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}}, actual local time 12-hour format suffix
@cindex Actual local time 12-hour format suffix @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@{@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text
@cindex Local time 12-hour format suffix, display

@code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@{@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}}
references the @strong{actual local time 12-hour format suffix}, which is
displayed as @w{@code{am@r{|}pm}}, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Local time suffix: %@{}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Local time suffix: am}}
in case the actual local time value is @w{07:32 o'clock}
@w{(@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}})}@.
@end quotation

In case Gcal is unable to compute the actual local time 12-hour format suffix
by reason of a misspecified @var{argument}, a @code{??} text will be created
instead of the actual local time 12-hour format suffix @w{@code{am@r{|}pm}}@.

@item %@@@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%@@@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text, actual Universal time in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}/@var{date}}} format
@cindex Special text @code{%@@@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}}, actual Universal time in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}/@var{date}}} format
@cindex Actual Universal time in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}/@var{date}}} format @code{%@@@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text
@cindex Universal time in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}/@var{date}}} format, display
@cindex Universal time (UTC)
@cindex Greenwich Mean time (GMT)

@code{%@@@r{[}*@r{][[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}}
references the @strong{actual Universal time} @w{(UTC/GMT)}, which is displayed
by using the @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}/@var{date}}} output format, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Universal time: %@@*-3.}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Universal time: 03:32am/15-Feb-1999}},
in case the actual date is the 15th February 1999 and the actual Universal
time value is @w{06:32 o'clock} @w{(@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}})}@.
@end quotation

In case Gcal is unable to compute the actual Universal time in
@w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}/@var{date}}} format by reason of a misspecified
@var{argument}, a @w{@code{??:??/??-???-????}} text will be created instead
of the actual Universal time in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}/@var{date}}} format.

@need 2000
@item %@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}`@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}`@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text, actual Universal time in @w{@code{@var{m}@r{[}@var{m}@r{@dots{}]}/@var{date}}} format
@cindex Special text @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}`@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}}, actual Universal time in @w{@code{@var{m}@r{[}@var{m}@r{@dots{}]}/@var{date}}} format
@cindex Actual Universal time in @w{@code{@var{m}@r{[}@var{m}@r{@dots{}]}/@var{date}}} format @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}`@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text
@cindex Universal time in @w{@code{@var{m}@r{[}@var{m}@r{@dots{}]}/@var{date}}} format, display
@cindex Universal time (UTC)
@cindex Greenwich Mean time (GMT)

@code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}`@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}}
references the @strong{actual Universal time in minutes since midnight}, which
is displayed by using the @w{@code{@var{m}@r{[}@var{m}@r{@dots{}]}/@var{date}}}
output format, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Universal time: %>06*`-3:}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Universal time: 000212/15-Feb-1999}}
in case the actual date is the 15th February 1999 and the actual Universal
time value is @w{06:32 o'clock} @w{(@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}})}@.
@end quotation

In case Gcal is unable to compute the actual Universal time in
@w{@code{@var{m}@r{[}@var{m}@r{@dots{}]}/@var{date}}} format by reason
of a misspecified @var{argument}, a @w{@code{??/??-???-????}} text will
be created instead of the actual Universal time in
@w{@code{@var{m}@r{[}@var{m}@r{@dots{}]}/@var{date}}} format.

@item %@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}.@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}.@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text, actual Universal time hour
@cindex Special text @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}.@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}}, actual Universal time hour
@cindex Actual Universal time hour @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}.@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text
@cindex Universal time hour, display
@cindex Universal time (UTC)
@cindex Greenwich Mean time (GMT)

@code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}.@r{[}*@r{][[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}}
references the @strong{actual Universal time hour}, which is displayed
by using the @w{@var{h}@r{[}@var{h}@r{@dots{}]}} output format, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Universal time hour: %.-1:}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Universal time hour: 5}}
in case the actual Universal time value is @w{06:32 o'clock}
@w{(@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}})}@.
@end quotation

In case Gcal is unable to compute the actual Universal time hour by reason
of a misspecified @var{argument}, a @code{??} text will be created
instead of the actual Universal time hour @w{@var{h}@r{[}@var{h}@r{@dots{}]}}@.

@item %@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}/@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}/@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text, actual Universal time minute
@cindex Special text @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}/@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}}, actual Universal time minute
@cindex Actual Universal time minute @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}/@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text
@cindex Universal time minute, display
@cindex Universal time (UTC)
@cindex Greenwich Mean time (GMT)

@code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}/@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}}
references the @strong{actual Universal time minute}, which is displayed
by using the @w{@var{m}@r{[}@var{m}@r{@dots{}]}} output format, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Universal time minute: %>04*/+:2}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Universal time minute: 0034}}
in case the actual Universal time value is @w{06:32 o'clock}
@w{(@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}})}@.
@end quotation

In case Gcal is unable to compute the actual Universal time minute by reason
of a misspecified @var{argument}, a @code{??} text will be created
instead of the actual Universal time minute @w{@var{m}@r{[}@var{m}@r{@dots{}]}}@.

@item %@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@}@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@}@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text, actual Universal time 12-hour format suffix
@cindex Special text @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@}@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}}, actual Universal time 12-hour format suffix
@cindex Actual Universal time 12-hour format suffix @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@}@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text
@cindex Universal time 12-hour format suffix, display
@cindex Universal time (UTC)
@cindex Greenwich Mean time (GMT)

@code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}}
references the @strong{actual Universal time 12-hour format suffix}, which is
displayed as @w{@code{am@r{|}pm}}, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Universal time suffix: %>1w*@}+10:}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Universal time suffix: Pm}}
in case the actual Universal time value is @w{06:32 o'clock}
@w{(@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}})}@.
@end quotation

In case Gcal is unable to compute the actual Universal time 12-hour format
suffix by reason of a misspecified @var{argument}, a @code{??} text will
be created instead of the actual Universal time 12-hour format suffix
@w{@code{am@r{|}pm}}@.

@need 1500
@item %"@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%"@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text, numerical Universal time timezone offset value
@cindex Special text @code{%"@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}}, numerical Universal time timezone offset value
@cindex Numerical Universal time timezone offset value @code{%"@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text
@cindex Numerical Universal time timezone offset value using @acronym{RFC}-822 style, display
@cindex @acronym{RFC}-822, numerical Universal time timezone offset value
@cindex Universal time (UTC)
@cindex Greenwich Mean time (GMT)

@code{%"@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}}
references the @w{@acronym{RFC}-822} style @strong{numerical Universal time
timezone offset value}, which is displayed by using the
@w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{hhmm}}} output format, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Universal time timezone offset value: %"-90}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Universal time timezone offset value: -0130}},
at which calculations are always based on the timezone of the Universal time
@w{UTC/GMT}.
@end quotation

In case Gcal is unable to compute the numerical Universal time timezone offset
value by reason of a misspecified @var{argument}, a @w{@code{+????}} text
will be created instead of the numerical Universal time timezone offset value
@w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{hhmm}}}@.

@item %=@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}
@cindex @code{%=@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text, numerical local time timezone offset value
@cindex Special text @code{%=@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}}, numerical local time timezone offset value
@cindex Numerical local time timezone offset value @code{%=@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text
@cindex Numerical local time timezone offset value using @acronym{RFC}-822 style, display
@cindex @acronym{RFC}-822, numerical local time timezone offset value

@code{%=@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}}
references the @w{@acronym{RFC}-822} style @strong{actual numerical local time
timezone offset value}, which is displayed by using the
@w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{hhmm}}} output format, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Local time timezone offset value CET: %=-10}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Local time timezone offset value CET: +0050}},
in case the actual timezone is equal the Central European (winter)time
@w{CEWT/CET} @w{(@code{+@var{hhmm}})}@.  Calculations are always based
on the timezone of the local time.
@end quotation

In case Gcal is unable to compute the actual numerical local time timezone
offset value by reason of a misspecified @var{argument}, a @w{@code{+????}}
text will be created instead of the actual numerical local time timezone offset
value @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{hhmm}}}@.
@end table

@node Textual date, Julian day number, Actual clocktime, Replacements with other argument
@appendixsubsubsec Textual date @code{%n@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text
@cindex @code{%n@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text, textual date
@cindex Special text @code{%n@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}}, textual date
@cindex Textual date @code{%n@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text
@cindex Fixed format date text

@code{%n@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{]}} references the current respectively
queried @strong{day number} relative to the current date
@ifnottex
@w{@samp{+@r{/}-} @var{n}}
@end ifnottex
@tex
$\pm$ \smartslanted{n}
@end tex
days and is replaced by a @strong{date text} by using the fixed
@w{@samp{%>02*D@r{-}%>3#U@r{-}%>04*Y}} format, e.g.@::

@quotation
The resource file line @w{@samp{1962Sep21 10000 days old: %n+10000}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{10000 days old: 06-Feb-1990}},
in case you call Gcal with the simple @option{-c} option and the command
@option{sep 1962}
(@pxref{x-mm-yyyy, , Single command @option{@var{mm} @var{yyyy}}})@.
@end quotation

@node Julian day number, Geographical distance and course angle, Textual date, Replacements with other argument
@appendixsubsubsec Julian day number @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}j@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text
@cindex @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}j@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text, Julian day number
@cindex Special text @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}j@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}}, Julian day number
@cindex Julian day number @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}j@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text

@cindex Universal time (UTC)
@cindex Greenwich Mean time (GMT)
@code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}j@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{]}} references the
current respectively queried @strong{Julian day number} relative to the actual
system date (@equiv{}today)@.  This day number is based on the date 1st
January 4713 BCE ---which is the starting day zero of a consecutive day
counting used in astronomical computations--- and is known as the Julian
Date (J.D.)@.  The real zero of this date is at 12 @w{o'clock} Universal time
@w{(UTC/GMT)}; the day does not change at midnight, but at noon Universal
time.  Here, Gcal does not evaluate the timezone returned by the systems
date function.  For that reason, this day number is represented
without a time fraction on the supposition that the day has already changed
at noon.  If you do not like the feature that the day displayed has already
changed at noon, you can decrease the resulting Julian day number of that
special text always by one, e.g.@: @samp{%j-1}@.

For example:

@quotation
The resource file line @w{@samp{0 Julian day %j since 01-Jan-4713 BCE}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Julian day 2437929 since 01-Jan-4713 BCE}},
in case you call Gcal with the @w{@option{-c %19620921}} option and no command.
@end quotation

If the @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}j} text is directly trailed by an unsigned
number, this number is always subtracted from the real Julian day number.  So
you are able to work with any quantities referenced, e.g.@::

@quotation
The resource file line @w{@samp{0 Julian day %j2415021 since 01-Jan-1900}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Julian day 4 since 01-Jan-1900}},
in case you call Gcal with the @w{@option{-c %19000105}} option and no command.
@end quotation

@node Geographical distance and course angle, Sun data, Julian day number, Replacements with other argument
@appendixsubsubsec Geographical distance and course angle @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}b@var{argument}} special text
@cindex @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}b@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text, geographical distance and course angle
@cindex Special text @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}b@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}}, geographical distance and course angle
@cindex Geographical distance and course angle @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}b@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text

@cindex Meridian
@cindex Orthodrome
@code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}b@r{[}*@r{][}@var{mode}@r{]}@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate-1}/@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate-2}}
references either the approximate @strong{air line distance} or the
approximate @strong{course angle (true track)}@footnote{The course angle
gives the direction, which is the vertex of a great circles arc
(@dfn{Orthodrome}) that is casted between two points on a surface of a sphere,
at a meridian (Gcal uses a geoid (rotation ellipsoid) that is calculated
taking pattern from the @cite{World Geodetic System}, short @acronym{W.G.S},
that was designed in 1961)@.  Such an arc is the shortest geodetic connecting
line between two points on a sphere.  Indeed, the course angles on such an arc
are changing continually, because the circular line that is casted intersects
each meridian with another angle --- except the case, that both co-ordinates
are referring to exactly the same @dfn{meridian} (longitude), or to exactly the
same latitude.} between any of two geographic point locations.  The selection,
which value has to be calculated by using this special text is done by
specifying the @var{mode} part of the preceding argument.  Actually,
exactly three different modes can be used that are represented by the
@w{@samp{0}@dots{}@samp{2}} characters:

@multitable @columnfractions .15 .85
@tbindex Modes, geographical distance and course angle
@tbindex Geographical distance and course angle, modes
@cindex Mode characters, geographical distance and course angle
@cindex Geographical distance and course angle, mode characters
@cindex Style of representation, geographical distance and course angle
@cindex Geographical distance and course angle, style of representation
@cindex Statute mile
@item @strong{Mode}
@tab @strong{Description}
@item @
@item @code{0}
@cindex Geographical distance @w{@code{%b0@var{argument}}} special text
@cindex Geographical distance @w{@code{%b*0@var{argument}}} special text
@tab Calculates the air line distance between
@w{@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate-1}} and
@w{@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate-2}}@.
The calculated air line distance value is displayed in kilometers by
default.  A @samp{*} character directly before this mode character causes
Gcal to display the distance value for another quantity, and that in
@dfn{statute miles}; where one statute mile is equal to @w{1.609344}
kilometer.  If Gcal is unable to compute the approximate distance between
the two geographic point locations by reason of a misspecified @var{argument},
a @w{@code{??}} text will be created instead of the distance value.
@item @
@item @code{1}
@cindex Course angle (true track) @w{@code{%b1@var{argument}}} special text
@cindex Course angle (true track) @w{@code{%b*1@var{argument}}} special text
@tab Calculates the course angle (true track) between
@w{@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate-1}} and
@w{@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate-2}}@.
The calculated course angle value is displayed in degrees and arcminutes
by default.  The course angle is measured clockwise relative to the geographic,
true North (not the magnetic North as shown by a compass), where angle values
for the North direction are both denoted as 0 degree and 360 degree.
A @samp{*} character directly before this mode character causes Gcal to display
the course angle value using another style; and that in decimal degrees.
If Gcal is unable to compute the approximate course angle between the two
geographic point locations by reason of a misspecified @var{argument}, a
@w{@code{???d??'}} text will be created instead of the course angle value.
@item @
@item @code{2}
@cindex Course angle (true track) @w{@code{%b2@var{argument}}} special text
@cindex Course angle (true track) @w{@code{%b*2@var{argument}}} special text
@tab Like mode @code{1}, but the course angle (true track) between
@w{@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate-2}} and
@w{@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate-1}} is calculated.
@end multitable
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

@cindex Default mode, geographical distance and course angle
@cindex Geographical distance and course angle, default mode
If no @var{mode} is given, Gcal automatically uses that mode, which is
enabled by the mode character @samp{0}@.  If a mode character is given
that is not according to one of the @w{@samp{0}@dots{}@samp{2}} characters,
Gcal also automatically uses that mode, which is enabled by the mode
character @samp{0}@.

@cindex @acronym{ISO}-6709:1983 co-ordinate
@cindex Co-ordinate, @acronym{ISO}-6709:1983
@cindex @samp{/} co-ordinate termination character
@cindex Co-ordinate termination character, @samp{/}
After the optional style and mode characters, the latitude and longitude of
the geographic co-ordinates follows, for which the calculations must be made.
They must be conform the @acronym{ISO}-6709:1983 standard representation of
latitude and longitude for geographic point locations.  The two co-ordinates
have to be separated by a @samp{/} termination character from each other.

@xref{x-Sun-arguments, , Arguments of the Sun oriented special texts},
for the detailed description of the components of the @acronym{ISO}-6709:1983
standard representation of latitude and longitude for geographic point
locations.
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

For example:

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Distance Paris-Tokyo: %b+4852+00220/+3542+13946 km}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Distance Paris-Tokyo: 9746km}}@.
@end quotation

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Distance Paris-Tokyo: %b*0+4852+00220/+3542+13946 ms}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Distance Paris-Tokyo: 6056ms}}@.
@end quotation

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Course angle Paris-Tokyo: %b1+4852+00220/+3542+13946}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Course angle Paris-Tokyo: 033d22'}}@.
@end quotation

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Course angle Tokyo-Paris: %b*2+4852+00220/+3542+13946}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Course angle Tokyo-Paris: 333.548}}@.
@end quotation
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@cindex Islamic prayer, direction to Makkah
@cindex Direction to Makkah, Islamic prayer
While praying, people of Islamic faith always turn their heads into the
direction of Makkah, @w{Saudi-Arabia}@.  Now by means of Gcal, these people
can easily find out for their respective location, where they have to turn
to, and that by:

@example
%b1@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate-1}/+212516+0394929
@end example

@noindent
where @w{@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate-1}} is simply
replaced by the co-ordinate of the respective location.

@xref{x-precise, , Fixed date option @option{--precise}},
how to obtain a more precise representation of the values
that are caused by this special text.

This special text @strong{must} always be trailed by a @emph{whitespace}
character which is removed in output!

@page
@node Sun data, Moon data, Geographical distance and course angle, Replacements with other argument
@appendixsubsubsec Sun data @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@var{argument}} special texts
@cindex @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@var{argument}} special texts, Sun data
@cindex Special texts @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@var{argument}}, Sun data
@cindex Sun data @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@var{argument}} special texts

@cindex Sunrise
@cindex Sunset
@cindex Solar day length
@cindex Solar night length
@code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}o@r{[}*@r{][}@var{mode}@r{]}@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}}
references the approximate time of @strong{sunrise} by default,@*
@code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}s@r{[}*@r{][}@var{mode}@r{]}@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}}
references the approximate time of @strong{sunset} by default,@*
@code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}u@r{[}*@r{][}@var{mode}@r{]}@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}}
references the approximate period of @strong{visibility} of the Sun
(solar day length) by default,@*
@code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}z@r{[}*@r{][}@var{mode}@r{]}@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}}
references the approximate period of @strong{non-visibility} of the Sun
(solar night length) by default.

All these special texts can be used for at pleasure any geographic point
location, i.e.@: it is possible to determine different astronomical values
for any location on the globe, and that for at pleasure any clocktime with
a resolution of a single minute within the period of the years @acronym{AD}
1 until @acronym{AD} 9999, that is respected by Gcal.

@cindex Mode characters, Sun data and times
@cindex Sun data and times, mode characters
The selection which value has to be calculated by these special texts is done
by specifying the @var{mode} part of the preceding argument.  Actually, exactly
54 different modes can be used that are represented by the
@w{@samp{0}@dots{}@samp{9}}, @w{@samp{a}@dots{}@samp{z}}
and @w{@samp{A}@dots{}@samp{R}} characters, and which create different kind of
results that are depending on the special text used.  First of all, here is a
table in which all usable modes are described and explained sufficiently.  You
can also see from this table, which Sun oriented special text or texts are
corresponding to which mode, i.e.@: cause the determination of an astronomical
value as it is described in the table:
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

@multitable @columnfractions .1 .18 .72
@tbindex Modes, Sun oriented special texts
@tbindex Sun oriented special texts, modes
@cindex Table of modes of the Sun oriented special texts
@cindex Sun oriented special texts, table of modes
@item @strong{Mode}
@tab @strong{Special text}
@tab @strong{Description}
@item @
@item @code{0}
@cindex Sun, astronomical midnight time @code{%o0@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, astronomical midnight time @code{%s0@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, astronomical midnight time @code{%o*0@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, astronomical midnight time @code{%s*0@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Astronomical midnight time, Sun
@cindex Midnight time of Sun, astronomical
@cindex Sun, noon line
@cindex Noon line, Sun
@cindex Sun, azimuth
@cindex Azimuth, Sun
@cindex Sun, lowest culmination point
@cindex Lowest culmination point, Sun
@anchor{x-Sun-midnight}
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate midnight time of the Sun.
The astronomical midnight time of the Sun is at that clocktime, when the
Sun holds an @dfn{azimuth} (horizontal angular distance between the vertical
circle, that passes the Sun, and the North point) of either precisely
0 degrees of precisely 180 degrees (@dfn{noon line}), which depends on
the season and the geographical location.
At that clocktime, the Sun is close its @dfn{lowest culmination point},
i.e.@: close the lowest point below or above the horizontal plane the
Sun transits during this day.
@item @
@item @code{1}
@cindex Sun, astronomical noon time @code{%o1@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, astronomical noon time @code{%s1@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, astronomical noon time @code{%o*1@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, astronomical noon time @code{%s*1@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Astronomical noon time, Sun
@cindex Noon time of Sun, astronomical
@cindex Sun, highest culmination point
@cindex Highest culmination point, Sun
@cindex Zuhr, Islamic prayer time
@cindex Islamic prayer time, Zuhr
@cindex Prayer time Zuhr, Islamic
@cindex Asr, Islamic prayer time
@cindex Islamic prayer time, Asr
@cindex Prayer time Asr, Islamic
@cindex Gnomon
@anchor{x-Sun-noon}
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate noon time of the Sun.
The astronomical noon time of the Sun is at that clocktime, when
the Sun holds an azimuth of either precisely 180 degrees of precisely
0 degrees (noon line), which depends on the season and the geographical
location.
At that clocktime, the Sun is close its @dfn{highest culmination point},
i.e.@: close the highest point above or below the horizontal plane the
Sun transits during this day.
People of Islamic faith normally pray for the second time on the day
during the period, which is between the astronomical noon time of the
Sun (or some minutes later) and the Islamic prayer time by the name
of @dfn{Asr}.  These people commonly use the term @dfn{Zuhr} for this
prayer time.  The timing of Asr depends on the length of the shadow
cast by a vertical pole (@dfn{gnomon})@.  According to the Shafi school
of jurisprudence, Asr begins when the length of the shadow of a vertical
pole exceeds the length of the pole.  According to the Hanafi school of
jurisprudence, Asr begins when the length of the shadow exceeds twice
the length of the vertical pole.  In both cases, the minimum length of
the shadow at astronomical noon time of the Sun is subtracted from the
length of the shadow before comparing it with the length of the pole.
@xref{x-Sun-asr-1, , Islamic Asr-1 prayer time},
and
@ref{x-Sun-asr-2, , Islamic Asr-2 prayer time},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{2}
@cindex Sun's center, geometrical rise time @code{%o2@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun's center, geometrical rise time @code{%o*2@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{o}
@tab Calculates the approximate time when the center of the Sun
passes a reference altitude of 0 degrees on a @dfn{mathematical-geocentric}
horizon in the morning; thus rising.
A mathematical horizon is a purely geometrically-built horizon which
disregards the phenomenon of refraction as it arises in reality by the
influence of the Earth's atmosphere.  A geocentrical horizon is the
horizontal plane that passes through the Earth's center, orthogonal
to the observer's local vertical.  In the further context, the shorter
term @emph{mathematical horizon} is used which actually means the
mathematical-geocentric horizon.
@item @
@item @code{2}
@cindex Sun's center, geometrical set time @code{%s2@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun's center, geometrical set time @code{%s*2@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate time when the center of the Sun
passes a reference altitude of 0 degrees on a mathematical horizon
in the evening; thus setting.
@item @
@item @code{2}
@cindex Sun's center, geometrical visibility @code{%u2@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun's center, geometrical visibility @code{%u*2@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{u}
@tab Calculates the approximate period while the center of the Sun
is above a reference altitude of 0 degrees on a mathematical horizon;
thus is visible.
@item @
@item @code{2}
@cindex Sun's center, geometrical non-visibility @code{%z2@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun's center, geometrical non-visibility @code{%z*2@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{z}
@tab Calculates the approximate period while the center of the Sun
is below a reference altitude of 0 degrees on a mathematical horizon;
thus is non-visible.
@item @
@item @code{3}
@cindex Sun's upper limb, geometrical rise time @code{%o3@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun's upper limb, geometrical rise time @code{%o*3@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{o}
@tab Calculates the approximate time when the upper limb of the Sun
passes a reference altitude of 0 degrees on a mathematical horizon
in the morning; thus rising.
The above mentioned reference altitude is computed from the
value of the Sun's semidiameter as it appear at that clocktime.
If the reference altitude that is referring to the Sun's upper limb is
converted to a reference altitude that is referring to the Sun's center,
this results in a value of about 16 arcminutes below the geocentric horizon.
@item @
@item @code{3}
@cindex Sun's upper limb, geometrical set time @code{%s3@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun's upper limb, geometrical set time @code{%s*3@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate time when the upper limb of the Sun
passes a reference altitude of 0 degrees on a mathematical horizon
in the evening; thus setting.
The above mentioned reference altitude is computed from the
value of the Sun's semidiameter as it appear at that clocktime.
@item @
@item @code{3}
@cindex Sun's upper limb, geometrical visibility @code{%u3@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun's upper limb, geometrical visibility @code{%u*3@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{u}
@tab Calculates the approximate period while the upper limb of the Sun
is above a reference altitude of 0 degrees on a mathematical horizon;
thus is visible.
@item @
@item @code{3}
@cindex Sun's upper limb, geometrical non-visibility @code{%z3@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun's upper limb, geometrical non-visibility @code{%z*3@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{z}
@tab Calculates the approximate period while the upper limb of the Sun
is below a reference altitude of 0 degrees on a mathematical horizon;
thus is non-visible.
@item @
@item @code{4}
@cindex Sun's center, rise time @code{%o4@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun's center, rise time @code{%o*4@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{o}
@tab Calculates the approximate time when the center of the Sun
passes a reference altitude of 34 arcminutes below the geocentric
horizon in the morning; thus rising.
The phenomenon of refraction is already respected in this as it arises in
reality by the influence of the Earth's atmosphere, and that with the standard
value of 34 arcminutes, which can indirectly be changed by using the
@w{@option{--atmosphere}} option.
@ref{x-atmosphere, , Fixed dates option @option{--atmosphere=@var{air-pressure}@r{[,}@var{temperature}@r{]}}},
how to change the base data of the atmosphere, so that the atmospheric
conditions as defined by it are used to calculate the amount of refraction.
@item @
@item @code{4}
@cindex Sun's center, set time @code{%s4@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun's center, set time @code{%s*4@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate time when the center of the Sun
passes a reference altitude of 34 arcminutes below the geocentric
horizon in the evening; thus setting.
The phenomenon of refraction is already respected in this as it arises in
reality by the influence of the Earth's atmosphere, and that with the standard
value of 34 arcminutes, which can indirectly be changed by using the
@w{@option{--atmosphere}} option.
@item @
@item @code{4}
@cindex Sun's center, visibility @code{%u4@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun's center, visibility @code{%u*4@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{u}
@tab Calculates the approximate period while the center of the Sun
is above a reference altitude of 34 arcminutes below the geocentric
horizon; thus is visible.
@item @
@item @code{4}
@cindex Sun's center, non-visibility @code{%z4@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun's center, non-visibility @code{%z*4@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{z}
@tab Calculates the approximate period while the center of the Sun
is below a reference altitude of 34 arcminutes below the geocentric
horizon; thus is non-visible.
@item @
@item @code{5}
@cindex Sun's upper limb, standard rise time @code{%o5@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun's upper limb, standard rise time @code{%o*5@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, standard rise time
@cindex Standard rise time, Sun
@anchor{x-Sun-standard-rise}
@tab @code{o}
@tab Calculates the approximate time when the upper limb of the Sun
passes a reference altitude of 34 arcminutes below the geocentric
horizon in the morning; thus rising.
This kind of rise time calculation is done according to the standard
calculation method as it is commonly used internationally.
The phenomenon of refraction is already respected in this as it arises in
reality by the influence of the Earth's atmosphere, and that with the standard
value of 34 arcminutes, which can indirectly be changed by using the
@w{@option{--atmosphere}} option.
@ref{x-atmosphere, , Fixed dates option @option{--atmosphere=@var{air-pressure}@r{[,}@var{temperature}@r{]}}},
how to change the base data of the atmosphere, so that the atmospheric
conditions as defined by it are used to calculate the amount of refraction.
The above mentioned reference altitude is computed from the respective
values of the Sun's semidiameter and (standard) refraction as they appear
at that clocktime.
If the reference altitude that is referring to the Sun's upper limb is
converted to a reference altitude that is referring to the Sun's center,
this results in a value of about 50 arcminutes below the geocentric horizon.
@item @
@item @code{5}
@cindex Sun's upper limb, standard set time @code{%s5@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun's upper limb, standard set time @code{%s*5@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, standard set time
@cindex Standard set time, Sun
@cindex Maghrib, Islamic prayer time
@cindex Islamic prayer time, Maghrib
@cindex Prayer time Maghrib, Islamic
@anchor{x-Sun-standard-set}
@tab @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate time when the upper limb of the Sun
passes a reference altitude of 34 arcminutes below the geocentric
horizon in the evening; thus setting.
This kind of set time calculation is done according to the standard
calculation method as it is commonly used internationally.
The phenomenon of refraction is already respected in this as it arises in
reality by the influence of the Earth's atmosphere, and that with the standard
value of 34 arcminutes, which can indirectly be changed by using the
@w{@option{--atmosphere}} option.
The above mentioned reference altitude is computed from the respective
values of the Sun's semidiameter and (standard) refraction as they appear
at that clocktime.
People of Islamic faith normally pray for the second-last time on the
day at this clocktime, or some minutes later.  These people commonly
use the term @dfn{Maghrib} for this prayer time.
@item @
@item @code{5}
@cindex Sun's upper limb, standard visibility @code{%u5@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun's upper limb, standard visibility @code{%u*5@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, standard visibility period
@cindex Standard visibility period, Sun
@tab @code{u}
@tab Calculates the approximate period while the upper limb of the Sun
is above a reference altitude of 34 arcminutes below the geocentric
horizon; thus is visible.
This kind of visibility period calculation is done according to the standard
calculation method as it is commonly used internationally.
@item @
@item @code{5}
@cindex Sun's upper limb, standard non-visibility @code{%z5@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun's upper limb, standard non-visibility @code{%z*5@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, standard non-visibility period
@cindex Standard non-visibility period, Sun
@tab @code{z}
@tab Calculates the approximate period while the upper limb of the Sun
is above a reference altitude of 34 arcminutes below the geocentric
horizon; thus is non-visible.
This kind of non-visibility period calculation is done according to the
standard calculation method as it is commonly used internationally.
@item @
@item @code{6}
@cindex Sun's center, begin of civil twilight @code{%o6@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun's center, begin of civil twilight @code{%o*6@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, civil twilight
@cindex Civil twilight, Sun
@cindex Twilight, civil
@tab @code{o}
@tab Calculates the approximate time when the center of the Sun
passes a reference altitude of 6 degrees below a mathematical horizon
in the morning; thus the beginning of @dfn{civil twilight}.
The scattered light of the Sun that is remaining at the beginning of the
civil twilight phase is in general not yet sufficient for reading outside
without artificial illumination.
@item @
@item @code{6}
@cindex Sun's center, end of civil twilight @code{%s6@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun's center, end of civil twilight @code{%s*6@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, civil twilight
@cindex Civil twilight, Sun
@cindex Twilight, civil
@tab @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate time when the center of the Sun
passes a reference altitude of 6 degrees below a mathematical horizon
in the evening; thus the ending of civil twilight.
@item @
@item @code{6}
@cindex Sun's center, period above civil twilight reference altitude @code{%u6@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun's center, period above civil twilight reference altitude @code{%u*6@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{u}
@tab Calculates the approximate period while the center of the Sun
is above a reference altitude of 6 degrees below a mathematical horizon;
thus the period, while the center of the Sun is always above -6 degrees.
@item @
@item @code{6}
@cindex Sun's center, period below civil twilight reference altitude @code{%z6@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun's center, period below civil twilight reference altitude @code{%z*6@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{z}
@tab Calculates the approximate period while the center of the Sun
is below a reference altitude of 6 degrees below a mathematical horizon;
thus the period, while the center of the Sun is always below -6 degrees.
@item @
@item @code{7}
@cindex Sun's center, begin of nautical twilight @code{%o7@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun's center, begin of nautical twilight @code{%o*7@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, nautical twilight
@cindex Nautical twilight, Sun
@cindex Twilight, nautical
@tab @code{o}
@tab Calculates the approximate time when the center of the Sun
passes a reference altitude of 12 degrees below a mathematical horizon
in the morning; thus the beginning of @dfn{nautical twilight}.
The scattered light of the Sun that is remaining at the beginning of the
nautical twilight phase is in general not yet sufficient for navigation
using a sea horizon.
@item @
@item @code{7}
@cindex Sun's center, end of nautical twilight @code{%s7@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun's center, end of nautical twilight @code{%s*7@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, nautical twilight
@cindex Nautical twilight, Sun
@cindex Twilight, nautical
@tab @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate time when the center of the Sun
passes a reference altitude of 12 degrees below a mathematical horizon
in the evening; thus the ending of nautical twilight.
@item @
@item @code{7}
@cindex Sun's center, period above nautical twilight reference altitude @code{%u7@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun's center, period above nautical twilight reference altitude @code{%u*7@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{u}
@tab Calculates the approximate period while the center of the Sun
is above a reference altitude of 12 degrees below a mathematical horizon;
thus the period, while the center of the Sun is always above -12 degrees.
@item @
@item @code{7}
@cindex Sun's center, period below nautical twilight reference altitude @code{%z7@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun's center, period below nautical twilight reference altitude @code{%z*7@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{z}
@tab Calculates the approximate period while the center of the Sun
is below a reference altitude of 12 degrees below a mathematical horizon;
thus the period, while the center of the Sun is always below -12 degrees.
@item @
@item @code{8}
@cindex Sun's center, begin of amateur-astronomical twilight @code{%o8@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun's center, begin of amateur-astronomical twilight @code{%o*8@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, amateur-astronomical twilight
@cindex Amateur-astronomical twilight, Sun
@cindex Twilight, amateur-astronomical
@tab @code{o}
@tab Calculates the approximate time when the center of the Sun
passes a reference altitude of 15 degrees below a mathematical horizon
in the morning; thus the beginning of @dfn{amateur-astronomical twilight}.
The scattered light of the Sun that is remaining at the beginning of the
amateur-astronomical twilight phase is in general yet so faint that most
astronomical observations can be made.
@item @
@item @code{8}
@cindex Sun's center, end of amateur-astronomical twilight @code{%s8@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun's center, end of amateur-astronomical twilight @code{%s*8@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, amateur-astronomical twilight
@cindex Amateur-astronomical twilight, Sun
@cindex Twilight, amateur-astronomical
@tab @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate time when the center of the Sun
passes a reference altitude of 15 degrees below a mathematical horizon
in the evening; thus the ending of amateur-astronomical twilight.
@item @
@item @code{8}
@cindex Sun's center, period above amateur-astronomical twilight reference altitude @code{%u8@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun's center, period above amateur-astronomical twilight reference altitude @code{%u*8@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{u}
@tab Calculates the approximate period while the center of the Sun
is above a reference altitude of 15 degrees below a mathematical horizon;
thus the period, while the center of the Sun is always above -15 degrees.
@item @
@item @code{8}
@cindex Sun's center, period below amateur-astronomical twilight reference altitude @code{%z8@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun's center, period below amateur-astronomical twilight reference altitude @code{%z*8@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{z}
@tab Calculates the approximate period while the center of the Sun
is below a reference altitude of 15 degrees below a mathematical horizon;
thus the period, while the center of the Sun is always below -15 degrees.
@item @
@item @code{8}
@cindex Sun's center, begin of astronomical twilight @code{%o9@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun's center, begin of astronomical twilight @code{%o*9@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, astronomical twilight
@cindex Astronomical twilight, Sun
@cindex Twilight, astronomical
@cindex Fajr, Islamic prayer time
@cindex Islamic prayer time, Fajr
@cindex Prayer time Fajr, Islamic
@tab @code{o}
@tab Calculates the approximate time when the center of the Sun
passes a reference altitude of 18 degrees below a mathematical horizon
in the morning; thus the beginning of @dfn{astronomical twilight}.
No appreciable scattered sunlight is remaining at the beginning of the
astronomical twilight phase, the sky is completely dark yet.
People of Islamic faith normally pray for the first time on the day
during the period, which is between this clocktime and the time of
standard sunrise.  These people commonly use the term @dfn{Fajr}
for this prayer time.
@xref{x-Sun-standard-rise, , Standard rise time of the Sun},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{9}
@cindex Sun's center, end of astronomical twilight @code{%s9@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun's center, end of astronomical twilight @code{%s*9@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, astronomical twilight
@cindex Astronomical twilight, Sun
@cindex Twilight, astronomical
@cindex Isha, Islamic prayer time
@cindex Islamic prayer time, Isha
@cindex Prayer time Isha, Islamic
@tab @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate time when the center of the Sun
passes a reference altitude of 18 degrees below a mathematical horizon
in the evening; thus the ending of astronomical twilight.
People of Islamic faith normally pray for the last time on the
day at this clocktime, or some minutes later.  These people commonly
use the term @dfn{Isha} for this prayer time.
@item @
@item @code{9}
@cindex Sun's center, period above astronomical twilight reference altitude @code{%u9@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun's center, period above astronomical twilight reference altitude @code{%u*9@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{u}
@tab Calculates the approximate period while the center of the Sun
is above a reference altitude of 18 degrees below a mathematical horizon;
thus the period, while the center of the Sun is always above -18 degrees.
@item @
@item @code{9}
@cindex Sun's center, period below astronomical twilight reference altitude @code{%z9@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun's center, period below astronomical twilight reference altitude @code{%z*9@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{z}
@tab Calculates the approximate period while the center of the Sun
is below a reference altitude of 18 degrees below a mathematical horizon;
thus the period, while the center of the Sun is always below -18 degrees.
@item @
@item @code{a}
@cindex Sun, topocentric elevation @code{%oa@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric elevation @code{%sa@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric elevation @code{%o*a@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric elevation @code{%s*a@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Elevation, Sun
@cindex Sun, topocentric data
@cindex Topocentric data, Sun
@cindex Sun, geocentric data
@cindex Geocentric data, Sun
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate @dfn{topocentric}, apparent @dfn{elevation}
of the Sun, thus the vertical angular distance between the Sun's center
and the horizon, in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
Results with a negative sign signify that the Sun's center is below the
horizon at the moment, and results with a positive sign mean that the
momentary center of the Sun is above the horizon.
Observations of celestial objects that are done from the surface of the
Earth yield in topocentrically based data.  The locations of the celestial
bodies are often at another place if the data is topocentrically determined
instead of determine it @dfn{geocentrically}, i.e.@: at the fictitious
center of the Earth.
This is mainly caused by the refraction, which raises a celestial body to
another location as it is been in reality.  Because the terrestrial globe
flattens towards the pole caps and therefore cannot be taken as an ideally
shaped sphere, the individual Earth radius between the observer's location
and the center of the Earth also affects the computation of
topocentrically based data.
@item @
@item @code{b}
@cindex Sun, topocentric azimuth @code{%ob@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric azimuth @code{%sb@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric azimuth @code{%s*b@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric azimuth @code{%o*b@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent azimuth
of the Sun in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{c}
@cindex Sun, topocentric declination @code{%oc@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric declination @code{%sc@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric declination @code{%o*c@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric declination @code{%s*c@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Declination, Sun
@cindex Celestial equator
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent @dfn{declination}
of the Sun, thus the vertical angular distance between the Sun's center
and the celestial equator, in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
Results with a negative sign signify that the Sun's center is below the
celestial equator at the moment, and results with a positive sign mean
that the momentary center of the Sun is below the celestial equator.
@item @
@item @code{d}
@cindex Sun, topocentric ecliptic longitude @code{%od@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric ecliptic longitude @code{%sd@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric ecliptic longitude @code{%o*d@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric ecliptic longitude @code{%s*d@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Ecliptic longitude, Sun
@cindex Vernal equinox point on the ecliptic
@cindex Ecliptic
@cindex Zodiacal line
@cindex Sun's orbit
@cindex Orbit, Sun's
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent @dfn{ecliptic longitude}
of the Sun, thus the horizontal angular distance between the Sun's center and
the vernal equinox point on the @dfn{ecliptic} (the zodiacal line or Sun's
orbit),
in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{e}
@cindex Sun, topocentric right ascension @code{%oe@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric right ascension @code{%se@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric right ascension @code{%o*e@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric right ascension @code{%s*e@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Right ascension, Sun
@cindex Vernal equinox point on the ecliptic
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent @dfn{right ascension}
of the Sun, thus the horizontal angular distance between the Sun's center and
the hour circle that passes through the vernal equinox point on the ecliptic,
as time value in hours and minutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{f}
@cindex Sun, topocentric distance @code{%of@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric distance @code{%sf@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric distance @code{%o*f@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric distance @code{%s*f@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, astronomical unit
@cindex Astronomical unit, Sun
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent distance
of the Sun from the Earth in @dfn{astronomical units}
as it happen at civil midnight time.
An astronomical unit, abbreviated by @acronym{ae}, is equal to the mean
distance of the Sun from the Earth, which is about @w{149,597,870.691}
kilometers.
@item @
@item @code{g}
@cindex Sun, topocentric horizontal parallax @code{%og@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric horizontal parallax @code{%sg@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric horizontal parallax @code{%o*g@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric horizontal parallax @code{%s*g@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Horizontal parallax, Sun
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent @dfn{horizontal parallax}
of the Sun in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
The horizontal parallax of the Sun specifies the diameter of the Earth
as it is seen from the surface of the Sun.
@item @
@item @code{h}
@cindex Sun, topocentric semidiameter @code{%oh@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric semidiameter @code{%sh@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric semidiameter @code{%o*h@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric semidiameter @code{%s*h@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent semidiameter
of the Sun in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{i}
@cindex Sun, refraction @code{%oi@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, refraction @code{%si@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, refraction @code{%o*i@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, refraction @code{%s*i@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate refraction of the Earth's atmosphere
in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{j}
@cindex Sun, geocentric elevation @code{%oj@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric elevation @code{%sj@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric elevation @code{%o*j@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric elevation @code{%s*j@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent elevation
of the Sun in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
Results with a negative sign signify that the Sun's center is below the
horizon at the moment, and results with a positive sign mean that the
momentary center of the Sun is above the horizon.
@item @
@item @code{k}
@cindex Sun, geocentric azimuth @code{%ok@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric azimuth @code{%sk@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric azimuth @code{%s*k@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric azimuth @code{%o*k@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent azimuth
of the Sun in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{l}
@cindex Sun, geocentric declination @code{%ol@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric declination @code{%sl@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric declination @code{%o*l@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric declination @code{%s*l@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent declination
of the Sun in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
Results with a negative sign signify that the Sun's center is below the
celestial equator at the moment, and results with a positive sign mean
that the momentary center of the Sun is above the celestial equator.
@item @
@item @code{m}
@cindex Sun, geocentric ecliptic longitude @code{%om@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric ecliptic longitude @code{%sm@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric ecliptic longitude @code{%o*m@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric ecliptic longitude @code{%s*m@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent ecliptic longitude
of the Sun in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{n}
@cindex Sun, geocentric right ascension @code{%on@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric right ascension @code{%sn@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric right ascension @code{%o*n@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric right ascension @code{%s*n@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent right ascension
of the Sun as time value in hours and minutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{o}
@cindex Sun, geocentric distance @code{%oo@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric distance @code{%so@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric distance @code{%o*o@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric distance @code{%s*o@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent distance
of the Sun from the Earth in astronomical units
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{p}
@cindex Sun, geocentric horizontal parallax @code{%op@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric horizontal parallax @code{%sp@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric horizontal parallax @code{%o*p@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric horizontal parallax @code{%s*p@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent horizontal parallax
of the Sun in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{q}
@cindex Sun, geocentric semidiameter @code{%oq@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric semidiameter @code{%sq@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric semidiameter @code{%o*q@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric semidiameter @code{%s*q@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent semidiameter
of the Sun in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{r}
@cindex Sun, delta-t @code{%or@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, delta-t @code{%sr@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, delta-t @code{%o*r@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, delta-t @code{%s*r@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Delta-t, Sun
@cindex Terrestrial Dynamical time (TDT)
@cindex Ephemeris time (ET)
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate @dfn{delta-t} in seconds
as it happen at civil midnight time.
Delta-t is the difference between the Terrestrial Dynamical time
(abbreviated by @acronym{TDT}), that was formerly known as @emph{Ephemeris
time} (abbreviated by @acronym{ET}), and the Universal time (@acronym{UT}).
Thus, @w{@samp{delta-t @equiv{} TDT - UT}}@.
@item @
@item @code{s}
@cindex Sun, local sidereal time @code{%os@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, local sidereal time @code{%ss@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, local sidereal time @code{%o*s@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, local sidereal time @code{%s*s@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sidereal time, Sun
@cindex Star day
@cindex Star time
@cindex Vernal equinox point on the ecliptic
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate, apparent location oriented
@dfn{sidereal time} (local sidereal time (@acronym{LAST}),
also known as @emph{local star time}) in hours and minutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
A @dfn{star day} is the period between two consecutive upper culminations
of the vernal equinox point on the ecliptic in the meridian of the observer's
location.  Therefore, the local @dfn{star time} is the momentary period,
which is past between the last upper culmination of the vernal equinox
point in the meridian of the observer's location (the momentary hour angle
of the vernal equinox point), thus the right ascension of the stars in the
observer's meridian at the moment.
@item @
@item @code{t}
@cindex Sun, base time @code{%ot@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, base time @code{%st@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, base time @code{%o*t@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, base time @code{%s*t@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Base time of astronomical functions, output
@cindex Output of base time of astronomical functions
@cindex Universal time (UTC)
@cindex Greenwich Mean time (GMT)
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Outputs the base time as time value in hours and minutes,
for which the dynamical, i.e.@: depending on the respective clocktime,
astronomical data and times of the Sun are calculated.
Without a given @w{@option{--time-offset=@var{argument}}} option,
the astronomical data and times of the Sun are always calculated
for 0 @w{o'clock} Universal time @w{(UTC/GMT)}@.
@xref{x-time-offset, , Calendar option @option{--time-offset=@var{argument}}},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{u}
@cindex Sun, Julian date @code{%ou@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, Julian date @code{%su@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, Julian date @code{%o*u@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, Julian date @code{%s*u@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate Julian date in days
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@xref{Julian day number},
for further information about the Julian date.
@item @
@item @code{v}
@cindex Sun, Julian Ephemeris date @code{%ov@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, Julian Ephemeris date @code{%sv@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, Julian Ephemeris date @code{%o*v@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, Julian Ephemeris date @code{%s*v@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Julian Ephemeris date
@cindex Ephemeris date, Julian
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate @dfn{Julian Ephemeris date},
thus a Julian date that is corrected by @emph{delta-t}, in days
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{w}
@cindex Sun, equation of time @code{%ow@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, equation of time @code{%sw@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, equation of time @code{%o*w@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, equation of time @code{%s*w@var{argument}} special text
@cindex True solar time
@cindex Solar time, true
@cindex Mean solar time
@cindex Solar time, mean
@cindex Mean solar day
@cindex Solar day, mean
@cindex True solar day
@cindex Solar day, true
@cindex Equation of time
@cindex Sundial
@cindex Sun, mean
@cindex Mean Sun
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate difference between @dfn{true solar time}
and @dfn{mean solar time} as time value in hours and minutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
This so-called @dfn{equation of time} is a correction to be added to the
true solar time ---as read on a sundial--- to obtain the mean solar time.
A @dfn{true solar day} is the period between two consecutive lower
culminations of the Sun.  This entity is taken as the base for deriving
the true solar time (as it is also shown by a sundial during the day)@.  A
star day is also known as a @cite{mean solar day}@.  Because the Sun apparently
shifts with respect to the vernal equinox point on the ecliptic due to
the Earth's orbit around the Sun, the star day and the true solar day
have a different length.  As the true Sun namely moves irregularly through
the ecliptic, a fictitious @dfn{mean Sun} with a symmetrical motion through
the celestial equator is used for deriving the mean solar time.
So, this difference in time is a consequence of the ellipticity and tilt
of the Earth's orbit, causing the irregular apparent movement of the Sun
across the sky.
@item @
@item @code{x}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta topocentric elevation @code{%ox@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta topocentric elevation @code{%sx@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta topocentric elevation @code{%o*x@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta topocentric elevation @code{%s*x@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the difference of the approximate topocentric,
apparent elevation of Sun and Moon (delta),
at which the Sun is used as the reference point,
in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
Results with a negative sign signify that the momentary center of the Sun is
at an elevation that is below the momentary elevation of the Moon's center;
thus the Sun is lower than the Moon.
Results with a positive sign signify that the momentary center of the Sun is
at an elevation that is above the momentary elevation of the Moon's center;
thus the Sun is higher than the Moon.
@item @
@item @code{y}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta topocentric azimuth @code{%oy@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta topocentric azimuth @code{%sy@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta topocentric azimuth @code{%o*y@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta topocentric azimuth @code{%s*y@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the difference of the approximate topocentric,
apparent azimuth of Sun and Moon (delta),
at which the Sun is used as the reference point,
in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
The result specifies the horizontal angular distance, by which the momentary
center of the Sun is distant from the momentary Moon's center, and that
measured at the vertical circles that pass the Sun and the North point
and the Moon and the North point.
Results with a negative sign signify that the Moon is to the right
(clockwise) of the Sun if one looks to the Sun --- or alternatively
expressed, that the Sun is to the left (anti-clockwise) of the Moon.
Results with a positive sign signify that the Moon is to the left
(anti-clockwise) of the Sun if one looks to the Sun --- or alternatively
expressed, that the Sun is to the right (clockwise) of the Moon.
@item @
@item @code{z}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta geocentric elevation @code{%oz@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta geocentric elevation @code{%sz@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta geocentric elevation @code{%o*z@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta geocentric elevation @code{%s*z@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the difference of the approximate geocentric,
apparent elevation of Sun and Moon (delta),
at which the Sun is used as the reference point,
in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{A}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta geocentric azimuth @code{%oA@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta geocentric azimuth @code{%sA@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta geocentric azimuth @code{%o*A@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta geocentric azimuth @code{%s*A@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the difference of the approximate geocentric,
apparent azimuth of Sun and Moon (delta),
at which the Sun is used as the reference point,
in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{B}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta topocentric elevation at standard sunrise time @code{%oB@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta topocentric elevation at standard sunrise time @code{%o*B@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{o}
@tab Calculates the difference of the approximate topocentric,
apparent elevation of Sun and Moon (delta),
at which the Sun is used as the reference point,
in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at standard rise time of the Sun.
@xref{x-Sun-standard-rise, , Standard rise time of the Sun},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{B}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta topocentric elevation at standard sunset time @code{%sB@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta topocentric elevation at standard sunset time @code{%s*B@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{s}
@tab Calculates the difference of the approximate topocentric,
apparent elevation of Sun and Moon (delta),
at which the Sun is used as the reference point,
in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at standard set time of the Sun.
@xref{x-Sun-standard-set, , Standard set time of the Sun},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{C}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta topocentric azimuth at standard sunrise time @code{%oC@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta topocentric azimuth at standard sunrise time @code{%o*C@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{o}
@tab Calculates the difference of the approximate topocentric,
apparent azimuth of Sun and Moon (delta),
at which the Sun is used as the reference point,
in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at standard rise time of the Sun.
@xref{x-Sun-standard-rise, , Standard rise time of the Sun},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{C}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta topocentric azimuth at standard sunset time @code{%sC@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta topocentric azimuth at standard sunset time @code{%s*C@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{s}
@tab Calculates the difference of the approximate topocentric,
apparent azimuth of Sun and Moon (delta),
at which the Sun is used as the reference point,
in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at standard set time of the Sun.
@xref{x-Sun-standard-set, , Standard set time of the Sun},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{D}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta geocentric elevation at standard sunrise time @code{%oD@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta geocentric elevation at standard sunrise time @code{%o*D@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{o}
@tab Calculates the difference of the approximate geocentric,
apparent elevation of Sun and Moon (delta),
at which the Sun is used as the reference point,
in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at standard rise time of the Sun.
@xref{x-Sun-standard-rise, , Standard rise time of the Sun},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{D}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta geocentric elevation at standard sunset time @code{%sD@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta geocentric elevation at standard sunset time @code{%s*D@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{s}
@tab Calculates the difference of the approximate geocentric,
apparent elevation of Sun and Moon (delta),
at which the Sun is used as the reference point,
in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at standard set time of the Sun.
@xref{x-Sun-standard-set, , Standard set time of the Sun},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{E}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta geocentric azimuth at standard sunrise time @code{%oE@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta geocentric azimuth at standard sunrise time @code{%o*E@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{o}
@tab Calculates the difference of the approximate geocentric,
apparent azimuth of Sun and Moon (delta),
at which the Sun is used as the reference point,
in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at standard rise time of the Sun.
@xref{x-Sun-standard-rise, , Standard rise time of the Sun},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{E}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta geocentric azimuth at standard sunset time @code{%sE@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta geocentric azimuth at standard sunset time @code{%s*E@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{s}
@tab Calculates the difference of the approximate geocentric,
apparent azimuth of Sun and Moon (delta),
at which the Sun is used as the reference point,
in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at standard set time of the Sun.
@xref{x-Sun-standard-set, , Standard set time of the Sun},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{F}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta astronomical midnight time @code{%oF@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta astronomical midnight time @code{%sF@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta astronomical midnight time @code{%o*F@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta astronomical midnight time @code{%s*F@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the difference of the approximate
astronomical midnight times of Sun and Moon (delta),
at which the Sun is used as the reference point,
as time value in hours and minutes
as it happen at astronomical midnight time of the Sun.
Results with a negative sign signify that the astronomical midnight time
of the Sun is earlier than the astronomical midnight time of the Moon;
thus the solar midnight is before the lunar midnight.
Results with a positive sign signify that the astronomical midnight time
of the Sun is later than the astronomical midnight time of the Moon;
thus the solar midnight is after the lunar midnight.
@xref{x-Sun-midnight, , Astronomical midnight time of the Sun},
and
@ref{x-Moon-midnight, , Astronomical midnight time of the Moon},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{G}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta astronomical noon time @code{%oG@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta astronomical noon time @code{%sG@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta astronomical noon time @code{%o*G@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta astronomical noon time @code{%s*G@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the difference of the approximate
astronomical noon times of Sun and Moon (delta),
at which the Sun is used as the reference point,
as time value in hours and minutes
as it happen at astronomical noon time of the Sun.
Results with a negative sign signify that the astronomical noon time
of the Sun is earlier than the astronomical noon time of the Moon;
thus the solar noon is before the lunar noon.
Results with a positive sign signify that the astronomical noon time
of the Sun is later than the astronomical noon time of the Moon;
thus the solar noon is after the lunar noon.
@xref{x-Sun-noon, , Astronomical noon time of the Sun},
and
@ref{x-Moon-noon, , Astronomical noon time of the Moon},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{H}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta standard rise time @code{%oH@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta standard rise time @code{%o*H@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{o}
@tab Calculates the difference of the approximate
standard rise times of Sun and Moon (delta),
at which the Sun is used as the reference point,
as time value in hours and minutes
as it happen at standard rise time of the Sun.
Results with a negative sign signify that the standard rise time
of the Sun is earlier than the standard rise time of the Moon;
thus the sunrise is before the moonrise.
Results with a positive sign signify that the standard rise time
of the Sun is later than the standard rise time of the Moon;
thus the sunrise is after the moonrise.
@xref{x-Sun-standard-rise, , Standard rise time of the Sun},
and
@ref{x-Moon-standard-rise, , Standard rise time of the Moon},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{H}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta standard set time @code{%sH@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta standard set time @code{%s*H@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{s}
@tab Calculates the difference of the approximate
standard set times of Sun and Moon (delta),
at which the Sun is used as the reference point,
as time value in hours and minutes
as it happen at standard set time of the Sun.
Results with a negative sign signify that the standard set time
of the Sun is earlier than the standard set time of the Moon;
thus the sunset is before the moonset.
Results with a positive sign signify that the standard set time
of the Sun is later than the standard set time of the Moon;
thus the sunset is after the moonset.
@xref{x-Sun-standard-set, , Standard set time of the Sun},
and
@ref{x-Moon-standard-set, , Standard set time of the Moon},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{I}
@cindex Sun, topocentric elevation at Sun's astronomical midnight time @code{%oI@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric elevation at Sun's astronomical midnight time @code{%sI@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric elevation at Sun's astronomical midnight time @code{%o*I@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric elevation at Sun's astronomical midnight time @code{%s*I@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, midnight height topocentric
@cindex Midnight height topocentric, Sun
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent elevation
of the Sun in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at astronomical midnight time of the Sun
(topocentric @dfn{midnight height})@.
@xref{x-Sun-midnight, , Astronomical midnight time of the Sun},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{J}
@cindex Sun, topocentric elevation at Sun's astronomical noon time @code{%oJ@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric elevation at Sun's astronomical noon time @code{%sJ@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric elevation at Sun's astronomical noon time @code{%o*J@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric elevation at Sun's astronomical noon time @code{%s*J@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, noon height topocentric
@cindex Noon height topocentric, Sun
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent elevation
of the Sun in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at astronomical midnight time of the Sun
(topocentric @dfn{midnight height})@.
@xref{x-Sun-noon, , Astronomical noon time of the Sun},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{K}
@cindex Sun, topocentric elevation at standard rise time @code{%oK@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric elevation at standard rise time @code{%o*K@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, rise height topocentric
@cindex Rise height topocentric, Sun
@tab @code{o}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent elevation
of the Sun in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at standard rise time of the Sun
(topocentric @dfn{rise height})@.
@xref{x-Sun-standard-rise, , Standard rise time of the Sun},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{K}
@cindex Sun, topocentric elevation at standard set time @code{%sK@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric elevation at standard set time @code{%s*K@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, set height topocentric
@cindex Set height topocentric, Sun
@tab @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent elevation
of the Sun in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at standard set time of the Sun
(topocentric @dfn{set height})@.
@xref{x-Sun-standard-set, , Standard set time of the Sun},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{L}
@cindex Sun, topocentric azimuth at standard rise time @code{%oL@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric azimuth at standard rise time @code{%o*L@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, rise azimuth topocentric
@cindex Rise azimuth topocentric, Sun
@cindex Sun, morning width topocentric
@cindex Morning width topocentric, Sun
@tab @code{o}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent azimuth
of the Sun in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at standard rise time of the Sun
(topocentric @dfn{rise azimuth})@.  The horizontal angular distance
between the topocentric rise azimuth and the East direction is also
known as the topocentric @dfn{morning width} of the Sun.
@xref{x-Sun-standard-rise, , Standard rise time of the Sun},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{L}
@cindex Sun, topocentric azimuth at standard set time @code{%sL@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric azimuth at standard set time @code{%s*L@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, set azimuth topocentric
@cindex Set azimuth topocentric, Sun
@cindex Sun, evening width topocentric
@cindex Evening width topocentric, Sun
@tab @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent azimuth
of the Sun in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at standard set time of the Sun
(topocentric @dfn{set azimuth})@.  The horizontal angular distance
between the topocentric set azimuth and the West direction is also
known as the topocentric @dfn{evening width} of the Sun.
@xref{x-Sun-standard-set, , Standard set time of the Sun},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{M}
@cindex Sun, geocentric elevation at Sun's astronomical midnight time @code{%oM@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric elevation at Sun's astronomical midnight time @code{%sM@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric elevation at Sun's astronomical midnight time @code{%o*M@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric elevation at Sun's astronomical midnight time @code{%s*M@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, midnight height geocentric
@cindex Midnight height geocentric, Sun
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent elevation
of the Sun in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at astronomical midnight time of the Sun
(geocentric @dfn{midnight height})@.
@xref{x-Sun-midnight, , Astronomical midnight time of the Sun},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{N}
@cindex Sun, geocentric elevation at Sun's astronomical noon time @code{%oN@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric elevation at Sun's astronomical noon time @code{%sN@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric elevation at Sun's astronomical noon time @code{%o*N@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric elevation at Sun's astronomical noon time @code{%s*N@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, noon height geocentric
@cindex Noon height geocentric, Sun
@tab @code{o}, @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent elevation
of the Sun in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at astronomical midnight time of the Sun
(geocentric @dfn{midnight height})@.
@xref{x-Sun-noon, , Astronomical noon time of the Sun},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{O}
@cindex Sun, geocentric elevation at standard rise time @code{%oO@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric elevation at standard rise time @code{%o*O@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, rise height geocentric
@cindex Rise height geocentric, Sun
@tab @code{o}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent elevation
of the Sun in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at standard rise time of the Sun
(geocentric @dfn{rise height})@.
@xref{x-Sun-standard-rise, , Standard rise time of the Sun},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{O}
@cindex Sun, geocentric elevation at standard set time @code{%sO@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric elevation at standard set time @code{%s*O@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, set height geocentric
@cindex Set height geocentric, Sun
@tab @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent elevation
of the Sun in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at standard set time of the Sun
(geocentric @dfn{set height})@.
@xref{x-Sun-standard-set, , Standard set time of the Sun},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{P}
@cindex Sun, geocentric azimuth at standard rise time @code{%oP@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric azimuth at standard rise time @code{%o*P@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, rise azimuth geocentric
@cindex Rise azimuth geocentric, Sun
@cindex Sun, morning width geocentric
@cindex Morning width geocentric, Sun
@tab @code{o}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent azimuth
of the Sun in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at standard rise time of the Sun
(geocentric @dfn{rise azimuth})@.  The horizontal angular distance
between the geocentric rise azimuth and the East direction is also
known as the geocentric @dfn{morning width} of the Sun.
@xref{x-Sun-standard-rise, , Standard rise time of the Sun},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{P}
@cindex Sun, geocentric azimuth at standard set time @code{%sP@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric azimuth at standard set time @code{%s*P@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, set azimuth geocentric
@cindex Set azimuth geocentric, Sun
@cindex Sun, evening width geocentric
@cindex Evening width geocentric, Sun
@tab @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent azimuth
of the Sun in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at standard set time of the Sun
(geocentric @dfn{set azimuth})@.  The horizontal angular distance
between the geocentric set azimuth and the West direction is also
known as the geocentric @dfn{evening width} of the Sun.
@xref{x-Sun-standard-set, , Standard set time of the Sun},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{Q}
@cindex Sun, single shadow length time at forenoon @code{%oQ@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, single shadow length time at forenoon @code{%o*Q@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Shadow length at forenoon, single
@cindex Single shadow length at forenoon
@tab @code{o}
@tab Calculates the approximate time when the length of the shadow cast
by a vertical pole in the forenoon is @strong{equal} the length of the pole.
Nevertheless, the minimum length of the shadow is subtracted from the
length of the shadow before comparing it with the length of the pole.
@xref{x-adjust-value, , Fixed dates option @option{--adjust-value=@var{argument}}},
how to change the shadow length factor.
@item @
@item @code{Q}
@cindex Sun, single shadow length time at afternoon @code{%sQ@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, single shadow length time at afternoon @code{%s*Q@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Shadow length at afternoon, single
@cindex Single shadow length at afternoon
@cindex Asr, Islamic prayer time
@cindex Islamic prayer time, Asr
@cindex Prayer time Asr, Islamic
@anchor{x-Sun-asr-1}
@tab @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate time when the length of the shadow cast by
a vertical pole in the afternoon is @strong{equal} the length of the pole.
Nevertheless, the minimum length of the shadow is subtracted from the
length of the shadow before comparing it with the length of the pole.
People of Islamic faith, and that the people holding the @emph{Shafi}
school of jurisprudence, normally pray for the third time on the day
at this clocktime, or some minutes later.  These people commonly use
the term @dfn{Asr} for this prayer time.
@xref{x-Sun-noon, , Astronomical noon time of the Sun},
for more information.  And note
@ref{x-adjust-value, , Fixed dates option @option{--adjust-value=@var{argument}}},
how to change the shadow length factor.
@item @
@item @code{Q}
@cindex Sun, period of single or shorter shadow length @code{%uQ@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, period of single or shorter shadow length @code{%u*Q@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Period of single or shorter shadow length
@cindex Single or shorter shadow length, period
@tab @code{u}
@tab Calculates the approximate period while the center of the Sun
is above a reference altitude, at which the length of the shadow cast
by a vertical pole is of single or shorter length than the pole itself.
@item @
@item @code{Q}
@cindex Sun, period of longer than single shadow length @code{%zQ@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, period of longer than single shadow length @code{%z*Q@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Period of longer than single shadow length
@cindex Longer than single shadow length, period
@tab @code{z}
@tab Calculates the approximate period while the center of the Sun
is below a reference altitude, at which a vertical pole either casts no
shadow anymore, or casts a shadow that is longer than the single length
of the pole itself.
@item @
@item @code{R}
@cindex Sun, double shadow length time at forenoon @code{%oR@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, double shadow length time at forenoon @code{%o*R@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Shadow length at forenoon, double
@cindex Double shadow length at forenoon
@tab @code{o}
@tab Calculates the approximate time when the length of the shadow cast
by a vertical pole at forenoon is @strong{twice} the length of the pole.
Nevertheless, the minimum length of the shadow is subtracted from the
length of the shadow before comparing it with the length of the pole.
@xref{x-adjust-value, , Fixed dates option @option{--adjust-value=@var{argument}}},
how to change the shadow length factor.
@item @
@item @code{R}
@cindex Sun, double shadow length time at afternoon @code{%sR@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, double shadow length time at afternoon @code{%s*R@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Shadow length at afternoon, double
@cindex Double shadow length at afternoon
@cindex Asr, Islamic prayer time
@cindex Islamic prayer time, Asr
@cindex Prayer time Asr, Islamic
@anchor{x-Sun-asr-2}
@tab @code{s}
@tab Calculates the approximate time when the length of the shadow cast by
a vertical pole in the afternoon is @strong{twice} the length of the pole.
Nevertheless, the minimum length of the shadow is subtracted from the
length of the shadow before comparing it with the length of the pole.
People of Islamic faith, and that the people holding the @emph{Hanafi}
school of jurisprudence, normally pray for the third time on the day
at this clocktime, or some minutes later.  These people commonly use
the term @dfn{Asr} for this prayer time.
@xref{x-Sun-noon, , Astronomical noon time of the Sun},
for more information.  And note
@ref{x-adjust-value, , Fixed dates option @option{--adjust-value=@var{argument}}},
how to change the shadow length factor.
@item @
@item @code{R}
@cindex Sun, period of double or shorter shadow length @code{%uR@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, period of double or shorter shadow length @code{%u*R@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Period of double or shorter shadow length
@cindex Double or shorter shadow length, period
@tab @code{u}
@tab Calculates the approximate period while the center of the Sun
is above a reference altitude, at which the length of the shadow cast
by a vertical pole is of double or shorter length than the pole itself.
@item @
@item @code{R}
@cindex Sun, period of longer than double shadow length @code{%zR@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, period of longer than double shadow length @code{%z*R@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Period of longer than double shadow length
@cindex Longer than double shadow length, period
@tab @code{z}
@tab Calculates the approximate period while the center of the Sun
is below a reference altitude, at which a vertical pole either casts no
shadow anymore, or casts a shadow that is longer than twice the length
of the pole itself.
@end multitable
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

@cindex Default mode, Sun data and times
@cindex Sun data and times, default mode
If no @var{mode} is given, Gcal automatically uses that mode, which is
enabled by the mode character @samp{5}@.  If a mode character is given
that is not according to one of the @w{@samp{0}@dots{}@samp{9}},
@w{@samp{a}@dots{}@samp{z}} and @w{@samp{A}@dots{}@samp{R}} characters,
Gcal also automatically uses that mode, which is enabled by the mode
character @samp{5}@.

@cindex Type of representation of Sun data and times
@cindex Sun data and times, type of representation
@cindex Style of representation of Sun data and times
@cindex Sun data and times, style of representation
@cindex Type of representation of Moon data and times
@cindex Moon data and times, type of representation
@cindex Style of representation of Moon data and times
@cindex Moon data and times, style of representation
@anchor{x-Sun-representation}
Gcal represents the Sun oriented special texts depending on the selected
mode using the following types and styles:

@enumerate 1
@item Unsigned decimal based rational number value@*
@cindex Unsigned decimal based rational number value, Sun and Moon oriented special texts
@cindex Sun and Moon oriented special texts, unsigned decimal based rational number value
Unsigned decimal based rational number values are represented using
the @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format by default.
A @samp{*} character that is directly given before some mode characters
causes Gcal to represent the value for another quantity.  For the mode
characters, which

@enumerate a
@item
cause the calculation of @w{Earth/Sun} or @w{Earth/Moon} distances,
the calculated distance is represented in kilometers.

@item
cause the calculation of phase angles of the Moon,
the calculated phase angle is represented as a phase value in percents.
@end enumerate

If definite events happen, Gcal displays special event oriented texts
instead of using the previously described representations.
@xref{x-Sun-event-texts, , Event texts of the Sun oriented special texts},
where you can find the event oriented texts that are created
for clocktime values, which are schematically and analogously
used for the type of representation as it is described here.

@item Signed decimal based rational number value@*
@cindex Signed decimal based rational number value, Sun and Moon oriented special texts
@cindex Sun and Moon oriented special texts, signed decimal based rational number value
Signed decimal based rational number values are represented using
the @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format by default.
A @samp{*} character that is directly given before a mode character
causes Gcal not to represent such values using another style.

If definite events happen, Gcal displays special event oriented texts
instead of using the previously described representations.
@xref{x-Sun-event-texts, , Event texts of the Sun oriented special texts},
where you can find the event oriented texts that are created
for clocktime values, which are schematically and analogously
used for the type of representation as it is described here.

@item Clocktime value@*
@cindex Clocktime value, Sun and Moon oriented special texts
@cindex Sun and Moon oriented special texts, Clocktime value
Clocktime values are represented in hours and minutes, and that in
the @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @emph{24-hour} format by default.
A @samp{*} character that is directly given before a mode character
causes Gcal to represent the clocktime value using the @emph{12-hour}
format, thus to provide it with a time suffix.
@xref{x-Actual-local-time, Actual local time @code{%t@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text, Actual localtime in @code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}} format @code{%t@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text},
for more details about the above mentioned time value template.

@tbindex Special event oriented texts, Sun data and times
@tbindex Sun data and times, special event oriented texts
@tbindex Event oriented texts of Sun data and times, special
@tbindex Special event oriented texts, Moon data and times
@tbindex Moon data and times, special event oriented texts
@tbindex Event oriented texts of Moon data and times, special
@cindex Special event oriented texts, Sun data and times
@cindex Sun data and times, special event oriented texts
@cindex Event oriented texts of Sun data and times, special
@cindex Special event oriented texts, Moon data and times
@cindex Moon data and times, special event oriented texts
@cindex Event oriented texts of Moon data and times, special
@anchor{x-Sun-event-texts}
If definite events happen, Gcal displays special event oriented texts
instead of using the previously described representations:

@itemize @bullet
@item
In case Gcal is unable to compute the approximate clocktime by reason
of a misspecified @var{argument}, a @w{@code{??:??}} text will be
created instead of the clocktime text.

@item
In case Gcal calculates an approximate clocktime that refers to a previous
or next day, or Gcal is unable to calculate a clocktime because the event
calculated does not occur during this day, a @w{@code{**:**}} text will
be created instead of the clocktime text.

@item
In case Gcal is unable to calculate an approximate clocktime because the
reference point of the astronomical object, thus either the center or the
upper limb of the Sun's or the Moon's disk, is always above the respective
reference altitude, a @w{@code{++:++}} text will be created instead of the
clocktime text.

@item
In case Gcal is unable to calculate an approximate clocktime because the
reference point of the astronomical object, thus either the center or the
upper limb of the Sun's or the Moon's disk, is always below the respective
reference altitude, a @w{@code{--:--}} text will be created instead of the
clocktime text.
@end itemize

@item Unsigned time value@*
@cindex Unsigned time value, Sun and Moon oriented special texts
@cindex Sun and Moon oriented special texts, unsigned time value
Unsigned time values, which mostly denote a period or interval of time,
are represented in hours and minutes using
the @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format by default.
A @samp{*} character that is directly given before a mode character
causes Gcal to represent the time value using another style, and that in
decimal hours, i.e.@: in the @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format.

If definite events happen, Gcal displays special event oriented texts
instead of using the previously described representations.
@xref{x-Sun-event-texts, , Event texts of the Sun oriented special texts},
where you can find the event oriented texts that are created
for clocktime values, which are schematically and analogously
used for the type of representation as it is described here.

@item Signed time value@*
@cindex Signed time value, Sun and Moon oriented special texts
@cindex Sun and Moon oriented special texts, signed time value
Signed time values, which mostly denote a period or interval of time,
are represented in hours and minutes using
the @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format by default.
A @samp{*} character that is directly given before a mode character
causes Gcal to represent the time value using another style, and that in
decimal hours, i.e.@: in the @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format.

If definite events happen, Gcal displays special event oriented texts
instead of using the previously described representations.
@xref{x-Sun-event-texts, , Event texts of the Sun oriented special texts},
where you can find the event oriented texts that are created
for clocktime values, which are schematically and analogously
used for the type of representation as it is described here.

@item Unsigned angular value@*
@cindex Unsigned angular value, Sun and Moon oriented special texts
@cindex Sun and Moon oriented special texts, unsigned angular value
Unsigned angular values are represented in degrees and arcminutes using
the @w{@code{@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format by default.
A @samp{*} character that is directly given before a mode character causes
Gcal to represent the angular value using another style, and that in
decimal degrees, i.e.@: in the @w{@code{@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format.

If definite events happen, Gcal displays special event oriented texts
instead of using the previously described representations.
@xref{x-Sun-event-texts, , Event texts of the Sun oriented special texts},
where you can find the event oriented texts that are created
for clocktime values, which are schematically and analogously
used for the type of representation as it is described here.

@item Signed angular value@*
@cindex Signed angular value, Sun and Moon oriented special texts
@cindex Sun and Moon oriented special texts, signed angular value
Signed angular values are represented in degrees and arcminutes using
the @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format by default.
A @samp{*} character that is directly given before a mode character causes
Gcal to represent the angular value using another style, and that in
decimal degrees, i.e.@: in the @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}}
format.

If definite events happen, Gcal displays special event oriented texts
instead of using the previously described representations.
@xref{x-Sun-event-texts, , Event texts of the Sun oriented special texts},
where you can find the event oriented texts that are created
for clocktime values, which are schematically and analogously
used for the type of representation as it is described here.
@end enumerate

@cindex @acronym{ISO}-6709:1983 co-ordinate
@cindex Co-ordinate, @acronym{ISO}-6709:1983
@anchor{x-Sun-arguments}
After the optional style and mode characters, the latitude and longitude of
the geographic co-ordinates follows, for which the calculations must be made.
They must be conform the @acronym{ISO}-6709:1983 standard representation of
latitude and longitude for geographic point locations, so that the co-ordinate
has to be declared like this:

@itemize @bullet
@tbindex @acronym{ISO}-6709:1983 co-ordinate
@tbindex Co-ordinate, @acronym{ISO}-6709:1983
@item
Latitude (@code{+} for North and on the equator,
@code{-} for South of the equator.)

@table @code
@item +@r{|}-@var{dd}@r{[}.@var{dd}@r{]}
Degrees (2 digits), and optionally decimal degrees

@item +@r{|}-@var{dd}@var{mm}@r{[}.@var{mm}@r{]}
Degrees (2 digits), arcminutes (2 digits), and optionally decimal minutes

@item +@r{|}-@var{dd}@var{mm}@var{ss}@r{[}.@var{ss}@r{]}
Degrees (2 digits), arcminutes (2 digits), arcseconds (2 digits),
and optionally decimal seconds
@end table

@item
Longitude (@code{+} for East and on the prime meridian (Greenwich),
@code{-} for West of Greenwich and up to the 180th meridian.)

@table @code
@item +@r{|}-@var{ddd}@r{[}.@var{dd}@r{]}
Degrees (3 digits), and optionally decimal degrees

@item +@r{|}-@var{ddd}@var{mm}@r{[}.@var{mm}@r{]}
Degrees (3 digits), arcminutes (2 digits), and optionally decimal minutes

@item +@r{|}-@var{ddd}@var{mm}@var{ss}@r{[}.@var{ss}@r{]}
Degrees (3 digits), arcminutes (2 digits), arcseconds (2 digits),
and optionally decimal seconds
@end table

@item
Optionally, the relative height in meters above the sea level (@code{+}
for heights above and on the sea level, @code{-} for heights below
the sea level.)

@table @code
@item @r{[}+@r{|}-@var{n}@r{[}@var{n}@r{[}@var{n}@r{[}@var{n}@r{]]]]}
Height in meters (integer number) in range
@w{@code{-9999}@dots{}@code{+9999}} (1@dots{}4 digits)
@end table
@end itemize

All components of the co-ordinates must have leadings zeroes in case they have
less digits than the templates shown above.  Declared decimal seconds are not
respected by Gcal.  Heights which have a negative sign remain unrespected
if Gcal determinates Sun and Moon data and times, respectively.  In such a
case, Gcal always uses the height @code{+0}@.  Latitude and longitude
co-ordinates, and the height of the observer's location are connected without
any separating characters, like @samp{+40-075+61}, @samp{+401213.1-0750015.1}
or @samp{+40.20361-075.00417+0061}@.  See the pertinent literature
for more details.

@cindex Local time
@cindex Universal time (UTC)
@cindex Greenwich Mean time (GMT)
@cindex Timezone
@cindex Summertime
@cindex Wintertime
@cindex Daylight Savings
A time value @w{@code{@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]}}},
which is separated by a @samp{,} character, may trail the co-ordinate.  Such
a time value informs Gcal, about how many minutes @var{mmmm} respectively
hours @var{hh} and minutes @var{mm} the geographic location is displaced
from Universal time @w{(UTC/GMT)}@.  This time displacement value defines
the timezone, which is actually valid for this location.  If summer- and
wintertimes are respected for the location, you should include that change
in time into the timezone value for the period in which the summertime is
valid, by which the clock is put on during the summertime period --- such
a change is either subtracted from the timezone value for locations West
of the prime meridian (Greenwich), or it is added for locations East of
the prime meridian, because Gcal is actually unable to perform such
operations automatically@!
@xref{x-Actual-local-time, Actual local time @code{%t@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text, Actual local time in @code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}} format @code{%t@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text},
for more details about the above mentioned time value template.
If no time displacement value is specified for a given co-ordinate, Gcal
assumes a time displacement value of @code{0}, which is equal to the actual
Universal time @w{(UTC/GMT)}@.

The following table informs you about which type of representation is caused
by a mode.  The previously defined numbering scheme, as it has been used
for the introduction of the types of representations, is used as key value
in the column that holds the type of representation.  The table also
contains a column that shows whether a mode enables dynamical values,
i.e.@: values that are depending on the respective clocktime (if you use
the @w{@option{--time-offset=@var{argument}}} option, you can change the
respective clocktime that is used for calculating such values)@.  In a next
table column, it is listed whether the given co-ordinate of the location
influences the determination of a value, and the last column of the table
gives you the information whether a given timezone value affects the
values determination:
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

@multitable @columnfractions .1 .3 .2 .2 .2
@tbindex Representation types of the Sun oriented special texts
@tbindex Sun oriented special texts, representation types
@cindex Table of representation types of the Sun oriented special texts
@cindex Sun oriented special texts, table of representation types
@item @strong{Mode}
@tab @strong{Representation Type}
@tab @strong{Dynamical}
@tab @strong{Co-ordinate}
@tab @strong{Timezone}
@item @
@item @code{0}
@tab 3
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{1}
@tab 3
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{2}
@tab 3 or 4
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{3}
@tab 3 or 4
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{4}
@tab 3 or 4
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{5}
@tab 3 or 4
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{6}
@tab 3 or 4
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{7}
@tab 3 or 4
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{8}
@tab 3 or 4
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{9}
@tab 3 or 4
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{a}
@tab 7
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{b}
@tab 6
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{c}
@tab 7
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{d}
@tab 6
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{e}
@tab 4
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{f}
@tab 1 or 1a
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{g}
@tab 6
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{h}
@tab 6
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{i}
@tab 6
@tab Yes
@tab No
@tab No
@item @code{j}
@tab 7
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{k}
@tab 6
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{l}
@tab 7
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{m}
@tab 6
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{n}
@tab 4
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{o}
@tab 1 or 1a
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{p}
@tab 6
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{q}
@tab 6
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{r}
@tab 2
@tab Yes
@tab No
@tab No
@item @code{s}
@tab 3
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{t}
@tab 3
@tab Yes
@tab No
@tab No
@item @code{u}
@tab 1
@tab Yes
@tab No
@tab No
@item @code{v}
@tab 1
@tab Yes
@tab No
@tab No
@item @code{w}
@tab 5
@tab Yes
@tab No
@tab Yes
@item @code{x}
@tab 7
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{y}
@tab 7
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{z}
@tab 7
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{A}
@tab 7
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{B}
@tab 7
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{C}
@tab 7
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{D}
@tab 7
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{E}
@tab 7
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{F}
@tab 5
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{G}
@tab 5
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{H}
@tab 5
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{I}
@tab 7
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{J}
@tab 7
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{K}
@tab 7
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{L}
@tab 6
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{M}
@tab 7
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{N}
@tab 7
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{O}
@tab 7
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{P}
@tab 6
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{Q}
@tab 3 or 4
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{R}
@tab 3 or 4
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@end multitable
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

@noindent
And now some examples to these special texts:

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Sunrise at %o+5158+00738,120 @ in MS, BRD}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Sunrise at 05:16 in MS, BRD}},
in case the actual system date is the 1st June 1998@.
@end quotation

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Sunset at %s*5+5158+00738,120 @ in MS, BRD}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Sunset at 09:39pm in MS, BRD}},
in case the actual system date is the 1st June 1998@.
@end quotation

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Sun visible %u5+5158+00738,120 @ in MS, BRD}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Sun visible 16h24' in MS, BRD}},
in case the actual system date is the 1st June 1998@.
@end quotation

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Sun non-visible %z*+5158+00738,120 @ in MS, BRD}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Sun non-visible 7.607 in MS, BRD}},
in case the actual system date is the 1st June 1998@.
@end quotation

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Sun azimuth 0 o'clock=%s*a+5158+00738,120 @ in MS, BRD}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Sun azimuth 0 o'clock=339d16' in MS, BRD}},
in case the actual system date is the 1st June 1998@.
@end quotation

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Equation of time %ot+00+000=%o*w+00+000,120 @ BRD}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Equation of time +16h00'=+00h02'13.201" BRD}},
in case you call Gcal with the @w{@option{--time-offset=16:}} and
@option{--precise} options and the actual system date is the 1st June 1998@.
@end quotation

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Julian date at %ot+00+000 =%ou+00+000}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Julian date at +10h15'=2450965.927}},
in case you call Gcal with the @w{@option{--time-offset=10:15}} option
and the actual system date is the 1st June 1998@.
@end quotation
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

@cindex Reference systems used, Sun oriented special texts
@cindex Sun oriented special texts, reference systems used
@cindex Limitations, Sun oriented special texts
@cindex Sun oriented special texts, limitations
Here is a list that reports about the used reference systems in a short
manner, describes other aspects that are unmentioned now, and informs
about the lacks and limitations that are existing for the Sun oriented
special texts:

@itemize @bullet
@item
All astronomical calculations are based on methods that use ---astronomically
seen--- low-precision elements, which of course is shown in the precision of
the results that are caused by them.  Nevertheless in most cases, these results
can be treated as more as sufficiently precise if one measures their practical
use.

@item
All azimuth and elevation values are always referring to the center of the
respective astronomical object, except the case, it is stated otherwise.

@item
The base point of azimuth values, right ascension values and other ecliptic
co-ordinate values is always measured clockwise relative to the geographical,
true North (not the magnetic North as shown by a compass), where angular
values for the North direction are both denoted as 0 degree and 360 degree.

@item
All topocentrically based azimuth and elevation values are always corrected
by the amount of atmospheric refraction.  Such a kind of correction is always
done if the center of the respective astronomical object is above 2 degrees
below the horizon.

@item
Generally, the rise and set times of the Sun cannot be precisely predicted,
because depending on unpredictable atmospheric conditions, i.e.@: the local
weather conditions as they appear during these times change the amount of
atmospheric refraction at the horizon, so that the precalculated rise and
set times may throughout be in error by a minute or more.

@cindex Solar Arctic Circle
@item
The accuracy of rise and set computations decreases again at high latitudes,
i.e.@: within in the solar Arctic Circle.  There, small variations in
atmospheric refraction can change the time of sunrise or sunset by many
minutes, since the Sun intersects the horizon at a very shallow angle.
For the same reason, at high latitudes, the effects of observer height
and local topography are magnified and can substantially change the times
of the phenomena actually observed, or even whether the phenomena are
observed to occur at all.

@item
The short explanations that are given to the different twilight phases
all assume the model of ideal atmospheric conditions by default.  It is
obvious that these explanations all become meaningless if other conditions
occur in reality, like a cloudy sky or a badly polluted atmosphere.
@end itemize

@noindent
@strong{Please also note the following references:}

@itemize @bullet
@item
@xref{x-precise, , Fixed dates option @option{--precise}},
how to obtain a more precise representation of the values
which are cause by these special texts.

@item
And note
@ref{x-time-offset, , Calendar option @option{--time-offset=@var{argument}}},
how to change the clocktime, for which the dynamical, i.e.@: depending on
the respective clocktime, Sun oriented special texts are calculated.

@item
Likewise, see
@ref{x-cycle-end, , Fixed dates option @option{--cycle-end=@var{argument}}},
how the dynamical, i.e.@: depending on the respective clocktime, Sun oriented
special texts are calculated for a series of clocktimes for the current day.

@item
And also note
@ref{x-adjust-value, , Fixed dates option @option{--adjust-value=@var{argument}}},
how to change the reference altitude that is used to calculate the rise and
set times, as well as the shadow length factor.

@item
Furthermore, see
@ref{x-atmosphere, , Fixed dates option @option{--atmosphere=@var{air-pressure}@r{[,}@var{temperature}@r{]}}},
how to change the base data of the atmosphere that influences the calculation
of the Sun oriented special texts.

@item
And last, note
@ref{x-limit, , Fixed dates option @option{--limit}},
how to limit the rise and set times of the Sun to the actual day.
@end itemize

All Sun oriented special texts @strong{must} always be trailed by a
@emph{whitespace} character which is removed in output!

@page
@node Moon data, Contents of Environment variable, Sun data, Replacements with other argument
@appendixsubsubsec Moon data @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@var{argument}} special texts
@cindex @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@var{argument}} special texts, Moon data
@cindex Special texts @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@var{argument}}, Moon data
@cindex Moon data @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@var{argument}} special texts

@cindex Moonrise
@cindex Moonset
@cindex Lunar day length
@cindex Lunar night length
@code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}(@r{[}*@r{][}@var{mode}@r{]}@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}}
references the approximate time of @strong{moonrise} by default,@*
@code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]})@r{[}*@r{][}@var{mode}@r{]}@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}}
references the approximate time of @strong{moonset} by default,@*
@code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}[@r{[}*@r{][}@var{mode}@r{]}@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}}
references the approximate period of @strong{visibility} of the Moon
(lunar day length) by default,@*
@code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}]@r{[}*@r{][}@var{mode}@r{]}@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}}
references the approximate period of @strong{non-visibility} of the Moon
(lunar night length) by default.

All these special texts can be used for at pleasure any geographic point
location, i.e.@: it is possible to determine different astronomical values
for any location on the globe, and that for at pleasure any clocktime with
a resolution of a single minute within the period of the years @acronym{AD}
1 until @acronym{AD} 9999, that is respected by Gcal.

@cindex Mode characters, Moon data and times
@cindex Moon data and times, mode characters
The selection which value has to be calculated by these special texts is done
by specifying the @var{mode} part of the preceding argument.  Actually, exactly
61 different modes can be used that are represented by the
@w{@samp{0}@dots{}@samp{9}}, @w{@samp{a}@dots{}@samp{z}}
and @w{@samp{A}@dots{}@samp{Y}} characters, and which create different kind of
results that are depending on the special text used.  First of all, here is a
table in which all usable modes are described and explained sufficiently.  You
can also see from this table, which Moon oriented special text or texts are
corresponding to which mode, i.e.@: cause the determination of an astronomical
value as it is described in the table:
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

@multitable @columnfractions .1 .18 .72
@tbindex Modes, Moon oriented special texts
@tbindex Moon oriented special texts, modes
@cindex Table of modes of the Moon oriented special texts
@cindex Moon oriented special texts, table of modes
@item @strong{Mode}
@tab @strong{Special text}
@tab @strong{Description}
@item @
@item @code{0}
@cindex Moon, astronomical midnight time @code{%(0@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, astronomical midnight time @code{%)0@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, astronomical midnight time @code{%(*0@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, astronomical midnight time @code{%)*0@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Astronomical midnight time, Moon
@cindex Midnight time of Moon, astronomical
@cindex Moon, azimuth
@cindex Azimuth, Moon
@cindex Moon, lowest culmination point
@cindex Lowest culmination point, Moon
@cindex Moon, conjunction
@cindex Conjunction, Moon
@cindex Moon, synodic month
@cindex Synodic month, Moon
@cindex Moon, lunation
@cindex Lunation, Moon
@anchor{x-Moon-midnight}
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate midnight time of the Moon.
The astronomical midnight time of the Moon is at that clocktime, when the
Moon holds an @dfn{azimuth} (horizontal angular distance between the vertical
circle, that passes the Moon, and the North point) of either precisely
0 degrees of precisely 180 degrees, which depends on the season and
the geographical location.
At that clocktime, the Moon is close its @dfn{lowest culmination point},
i.e.@: close the lowest point below or above the horizontal plane the
Moon transits during this day.
Nevertheless, there is exactly one day during a @dfn{synodic month} (or
lunation) ---i.e.@: the mean time between two consecutive @dfn{conjunctions}
(or New Moon phases)--- at which no lunar midnight happens, because the Moon
revolves the Earth within 24 hours and 50 minutes on the average --- which
also means, that the Moon rises on the average 50 minutes later each day.
@item @
@item @code{1}
@cindex Moon, astronomical noon time @code{%(1@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, astronomical noon time @code{%)1@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, astronomical noon time @code{%(*1@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, astronomical noon time @code{%)*1@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Astronomical noon time, Moon
@cindex Noon time of Moon, astronomical
@cindex Moon, highest culmination point
@cindex Highest culmination point, Moon
@anchor{x-Moon-noon}
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate noon time of the Moon.
The astronomical noon time of the Moon is at that clocktime, when
the Moon holds an azimuth of either precisely 180 degrees of precisely
0 degrees, which depends on the season and the geographical location.
At that clocktime, the Moon is close its @dfn{highest culmination point},
i.e.@: close the highest point above or below the horizontal plane the
Moon transits during this day.
Nevertheless, there is exactly one day during a synodic month at which
no lunar noon happens.
@item @
@item @code{2}
@cindex Moon's center, geometrical rise time @code{%(2@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's center, geometrical rise time @code{%(*2@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, mathematical-geocentric horizon
@cindex Mathematical-geocentric horizon, Moon
@cindex Moon, geometric horizon
@cindex Geometric horizon, Moon
@tab @code{(}
@tab Calculates the approximate time when the center of the Moon
passes a reference altitude which is between about 54 and 61 arcminutes
above a @dfn{mathematical-geocentric} horizon before lunar noon time;
thus rising.
A mathematical horizon is a purely geometrically-built horizon which
disregards the phenomenon of refraction as it arises in reality by the
influence of the Earth's atmosphere.  A geocentrical horizon is the
horizontal plane that passes through the Earth's center, orthogonal
to the observer's local vertical.  In the further context, the shorter
term @emph{mathematical horizon} is used which actually means the
mathematical-geocentric horizon.
The above mentioned reference altitude is computed from the
value of the Moon's parallax as it appear at that clocktime.
Nevertheless, there is exactly one day during a synodic month
at which no such moonrise happens.
@item @
@item @code{2}
@cindex Moon's center, geometrical set time @code{%)2@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's center, geometrical set time @code{%)*2@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate time when the center of the Moon
passes a reference altitude which is between about 54 and 61 arcminutes
above a mathematical horizon after lunar noon time;
thus setting.
The above mentioned reference altitude is computed from the
value of the Moon's parallax as it appear at that clocktime.
Nevertheless, there is exactly one day during a synodic month
at which no such moonset happens.
@item @
@item @code{2}
@cindex Moon's center, geometrical visibility @code{%[2@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's center, geometrical visibility @code{%[*2@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{[}
@tab Calculates the approximate period while the center of the Moon
is above a reference altitude which is between about 54 and 61 arcminutes
above a mathematical horizon; thus is visible.
@item @
@item @code{2}
@cindex Moon's center, geometrical non-visibility @code{%]2@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's center, geometrical non-visibility @code{%]*2@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{]}
@tab Calculates the approximate period while the center of the Moon
is below a reference altitude which is between about 54 and 61 arcminutes
above a mathematical horizon; thus is non-visible.
@item @
@item @code{3}
@cindex Moon's upper limb, geometrical rise time @code{%(3@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's upper limb, geometrical rise time @code{%(*3@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{(}
@tab Calculates the approximate time when the upper limb of the Moon
passes a reference altitude which is between about 54 and 61 arcminutes
above a mathematical horizon before lunar noon time; thus rising.
The above mentioned reference altitude is computed from the respective
values of the Moon's semidiameter and Moon's parallax as they appear
at that clocktime.
If the reference altitude that is referring to the Moon's upper limb is
converted to a reference altitude that is referring to the Moon's center,
this results in a value which is between about 39 and 44 arcminutes
above the geocentric horizon.
Nevertheless, there is exactly one day during a synodic month at which
no such moonrise happens.
@item @
@item @code{3}
@cindex Moon's upper limb, geometrical set time @code{%)3@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's upper limb, geometrical set time @code{%)*3@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate time when the upper limb of the Moon
passes a reference altitude which is between about 54 and 61 arcminutes
above a mathematical horizon after lunar noon time; thus setting.
The above mentioned reference altitude is computed from the respective
values of the Moon's semidiameter and Moon's parallax as they appear
at that clocktime.
Nevertheless, there is exactly one day during a synodic month at which
no such moonset happens.
@item @
@item @code{3}
@cindex Moon's upper limb, geometrical visibility @code{%[3@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's upper limb, geometrical visibility @code{%[*3@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{[}
@tab Calculates the approximate period while the upper limb of the Moon
is above a reference altitude which is between about 54 and 61 arcminutes
above a mathematical horizon; thus is visible.
@item @
@item @code{3}
@cindex Moon's upper limb, geometrical non-visibility @code{%]3@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's upper limb, geometrical non-visibility @code{%]*3@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{]}
@tab Calculates the approximate period while the upper limb of the Moon
is below a reference altitude which is between about 54 and 61 arcminutes
above a mathematical horizon; thus is non-visible.
@item @
@item @code{4}
@cindex Moon's center, rise time @code{%(4@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's center, rise time @code{%(*4@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{(}
@tab Calculates the approximate time when the center of the Moon
passes a reference altitude which is between about 20 and 27 arcminutes
above the geocentric horizon before lunar noon time; thus rising.
The phenomenon of refraction is already respected in this as it arises in
reality by the influence of the Earth's atmosphere, and that with the standard
value of 34 arcminutes, which can indirectly be changed by using the
@w{@option{--atmosphere}} option.
@ref{x-atmosphere, , Fixed dates option @option{--atmosphere=@var{air-pressure}@r{[,}@var{temperature}@r{]}}},
how to change the base data of the atmosphere, so that the atmospheric
conditions as defined by it are used to calculate the amount of refraction.
The above mentioned reference altitude is computed from the respective
values of the Moon's parallax and (standard) refraction as they appear
at that clocktime.
Nevertheless, there is exactly one day during a synodic month at which
no such moonrise happens.
@item @
@item @code{4}
@cindex Moon's center, set time @code{%)4@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's center, set time @code{%)*4@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate time when the center of the Moon
passes a reference altitude which is between about 20 and 27 arcminutes
above the geocentric horizon after lunar noon time; thus setting.
The phenomenon of refraction is already respected in this as it arises in
reality by the influence of the Earth's atmosphere, and that with the standard
value of 34 arcminutes, which can indirectly be changed by using the
@w{@option{--atmosphere}} option.
The above mentioned reference altitude is computed from the respective
values of the Moon's parallax and (standard) refraction as they appear
at that clocktime.
Nevertheless, there is exactly one day during a synodic month at which
no such moonset happens.
@item @
@item @code{4}
@cindex Moon's center, visibility @code{%[4@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's center, visibility @code{%[*4@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{[}
@tab Calculates the approximate period while the center of the Moon
is above a reference altitude which is between about 20 and 27 arcminutes
above the geocentric horizon; thus is visible.
@item @
@item @code{4}
@cindex Moon's center, non-visibility @code{%]4@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's center, non-visibility @code{%]*4@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{]}
@tab Calculates the approximate period while the center of the Moon
is below a reference altitude which is between about 20 and 27 arcminutes
above the geocentric horizon; thus is non-visible.
@item @
@item @code{5}
@cindex Moon's upper limb, standard rise time @code{%(5@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's upper limb, standard rise time @code{%(*5@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, standard rise time
@cindex Standard rise time, Moon
@anchor{x-Moon-standard-rise}
@tab @code{(}
@tab Calculates the approximate time when the upper limb of the Moon
passes a reference altitude which is between about 20 and 27 arcminutes
above the geocentric horizon before lunar noon time; thus rising.
This kind of rise time calculation is done according to the standard
calculation method as it is commonly used internationally.
The phenomenon of refraction is already respected in this as it arises in
reality by the influence of the Earth's atmosphere, and that with the standard
value of 34 arcminutes, which can indirectly be changed by using the
@w{@option{--atmosphere}} option.
@ref{x-atmosphere, , Fixed dates option @option{--atmosphere=@var{air-pressure}@r{[,}@var{temperature}@r{]}}},
how to change the base data of the atmosphere, so that the atmospheric
conditions as defined by it are used to calculate the amount of refraction.
The above mentioned reference altitude is computed from the respective
values of the Moon's semidiameter, Moon's parallax and (standard) refraction
as they appear at that clocktime.
If the reference altitude that is referring to the Moon's upper limb is
converted to a reference altitude that is referring to the Moon's center,
this results in a value which is between about 5 and 10 arcminutes above
the geocentric horizon.
Nevertheless, there is exactly one day during a synodic month at which
no such moonrise happens.
@item @
@item @code{5}
@cindex Moon's upper limb, standard set time @code{%)5@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's upper limb, standard set time @code{%)*5@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, standard set time
@cindex Standard set time, Moon
@anchor{x-Moon-standard-set}
@tab @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate time at which the upper limb of the Moon
passes a reference altitude which is between about 20 and 27 arcminutes
above the geocentric horizon after lunar noon time; thus setting.
This kind of set time calculation is done according to the standard
calculation method as it is commonly used internationally.
The phenomenon of refraction is already respected in this as it arises in
reality by the influence of the Earth's atmosphere, and that with the standard
value of 34 arcminutes, which can indirectly be changed by using the
@w{@option{--atmosphere}} option.
The above mentioned reference altitude is computed from the respective
values of the Moon's semidiameter, Moon's parallax and (standard) refraction
as they appear at that clocktime.
Nevertheless, there is exactly one day during a synodic month at which
no such moonset happens.
@item @
@item @code{5}
@cindex Moon's upper limb, standard visibility @code{%[5@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's upper limb, standard visibility @code{%[*5@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, standard visibility period
@cindex Standard visibility period, Moon
@tab @code{[}
@tab Calculates the approximate period while the upper limb of the Moon
is above a reference altitude which is between about 20 and 27 arcminutes
above the geocentric horizon; thus is visible.
This kind of visibility period calculation is done according to the standard
calculation method as it is commonly used internationally.
@item @
@item @code{5}
@cindex Moon's upper limb, standard non-visibility @code{%]5@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's upper limb, standard non-visibility @code{%]*5@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, standard non-visibility period
@cindex Standard non-visibility period, Moon
@tab @code{]}
@tab Calculates the approximate period while the upper limb of the Moon
is below a reference altitude which is between about 20 and 27 arcminutes
above the geocentric horizon; thus is non-visible.
This kind of non-visibility period calculation is done according to the
standard calculation method as it is commonly used internationally.
@item @
@item @code{6}
@cindex Moon's center, topocentric horizontal parallax @code{%(6@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's center, topocentric horizontal parallax @code{%)6@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's center, topocentric horizontal parallax @code{%(*6@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's center, topocentric horizontal parallax @code{%)*6@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Horizontal parallax, moon
@cindex Moon, topocentric data
@cindex Topocentric data, Moon
@cindex Moon, geocentric data
@cindex Geocentric data, Moon
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate @dfn{topocentric}, apparent
@dfn{horizontal parallax} of the Moon in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
The Moon's parallax states the diameter of the Earth as it is seen from
the surface of the Moon.
Observations of celestial objects that are done from the surface of the
Earth yield in topocentrically based data.  The locations of the celestial
bodies are often at another place if the data is topocentrically determined
instead of determine it @dfn{geocentrically}, i.e.@: at the fictitious
center of the Earth.
This is mainly caused by the refraction, which raises a celestial body to
another location as it is been in reality.  Because the terrestrial globe
flattens towards the pole caps and therefore cannot be taken as an ideally
shaped sphere, the individual Earth radius between the observer's location
and the center of the Earth also affects the computation of
topocentrically based data.
@item @
@item @code{7}
@cindex Moon's center, topocentric semidiameter @code{%(7@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's center, topocentric semidiameter @code{%)7@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's center, topocentric semidiameter @code{%(*7@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's center, topocentric semidiameter @code{%)*7@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent semidiameter
of the Moon in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{8}
@cindex Moon's center, topocentric brightness @code{%(8@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's center, topocentric brightness @code{%)8@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's center, topocentric brightness @code{%(*8@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's center, topocentric brightness @code{%)*8@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, magnitude units
@cindex Magnitude units, Moon
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent brightness
of the Moon in @dfn{magnitude units}
as it happen at civil midnight time.
The magnitude (Latin term @cite{magnitudo}, abbreviated @acronym{m}) is used
to define the brightness of a star, and is a non-metrical value.  The
difference between two consecutive magnitudes is 1 to @w{2.512}@.  Therefore,
a star with the brightness of @w{1@acronym{m}} is @w{2.512} times brighter than
a star of @w{2@acronym{m}}@.  A negative magnitude denotes a very bright star,
for example almost @w{-27@acronym{m}} for the Sun, whereas the hardly visible
planet Pluto has a magnitude of a bit more than @w{+14@acronym{m}}@.  The Full
Moon has a visual brightness of about @w{-12@acronym{m}.55}@.
@item @
@item @code{9}
@cindex Moon's center, topocentric phase angle @code{%(9@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's center, topocentric phase angle @code{%)9@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's center, topocentric phase angle @code{%(*9@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's center, topocentric phase angle @code{%)*9@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent phase angle
of the Moon in range @w{0.0@dots{}1.0}
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{a}
@cindex Moon, topocentric elevation @code{%(a@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric elevation @code{%)a@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric elevation @code{%(*a@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric elevation @code{%)*a@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Elevation, Moon
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent @dfn{elevation}
of the Moon, thus the vertical angular distance between the Moon's center
and the horizon, in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
Results with a negative sign signify that the Moon's center is below the
horizon at the moment, and results with a positive sign mean that the
momentary center of the Moon is above the horizon.
@item @
@item @code{b}
@cindex Moon, topocentric azimuth @code{%(b@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric azimuth @code{%)b@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric azimuth @code{%)*b@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric azimuth @code{%(*b@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent azimuth
of the Moon in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{c}
@cindex Moon, topocentric declination @code{%(c@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric declination @code{%)c@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric declination @code{%(*c@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric declination @code{%)*c@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Declination, Moon
@cindex Celestial equator
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent @dfn{declination}
of the Moon, thus the vertical angular distance between the Moon's center
and the celestial equator, in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
Results with a negative sign signify that the Moon's center is below the
celestial equator at the moment, and results with a positive sign mean that
the momentary center of the Moon is above the celestial equator.
@item @
@item @code{d}
@cindex Moon, topocentric ecliptic longitude @code{%(d@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric ecliptic longitude @code{%)d@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric ecliptic longitude @code{%(*d@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric ecliptic longitude @code{%)*d@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Ecliptic longitude, Moon
@cindex Vernal equinox point on the ecliptic
@cindex Ecliptic
@cindex Zodiacal line
@cindex Sun's orbit
@cindex Orbit, Sun's
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent @dfn{ecliptic longitude}
of the Moon, thus the horizontal angular distance between the Moon's center and
the vernal equinox point on the @dfn{ecliptic} (the zodiacal line or Sun's
orbit),
in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{e}
@cindex Moon, topocentric ecliptic latitude @code{%(e@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric ecliptic latitude @code{%)e@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric ecliptic latitude @code{%(*e@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric ecliptic latitude @code{%)*e@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Ecliptic latitude, Moon
@cindex Ecliptic
@cindex Zodiacal line
@cindex Sun's orbit
@cindex Orbit, Sun's
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent @dfn{ecliptic latitude}
of the Moon, thus the vertical angular distance between the Moon's center
and the ecliptic (zodiacal line/Sun's orbit),
in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
Results with a negative sign signify that the Moon's center is North
of the ecliptic at the moment, and results with a positive sign mean
that the momentary center of the Moon is South of the ecliptic.
@item @
@item @code{f}
@cindex Moon, topocentric right ascension @code{%(f@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric right ascension @code{%)f@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric right ascension @code{%(*f@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric right ascension @code{%)*f@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Right ascension, Moon
@cindex Vernal equinox point on the ecliptic
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent @dfn{right ascension}
of the Moon, thus the horizontal angular distance between the Moon's center
and the hour circle that passes through the vernal equinox point on the
ecliptic, as time value in hours and minutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{g}
@cindex Moon, topocentric distance @code{%(g@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric distance @code{%)g@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric distance @code{%(*g@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric distance @code{%)*g@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Earth equator radius, unit
@cindex Unit, Earth equator radius
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent distance
of the Moon from the Earth in mean @dfn{Earth equator radii}
as it happen at civil midnight time.
The mean radius of Earth at the equator is about @w{6,378.137} kilometer.
@item @
@item @code{h}
@cindex Moon, topocentric elongation @code{%(h@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric elongation @code{%)h@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric elongation @code{%(*h@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric elongation @code{%)*h@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Elongation, Moon
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent @dfn{elongation}
of the Moon, thus the horizontal angular distance between the Moon's center
and the Sun's center,
in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{i}
@cindex Moon, refraction @code{%(i@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, refraction @code{%)i@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, refraction @code{%(*i@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, refraction @code{%)*i@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate refraction of the Earth's atmosphere
in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{j}
@cindex Moon's center, geocentric horizontal parallax @code{%(j@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's center, geocentric horizontal parallax @code{%)j@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's center, geocentric horizontal parallax @code{%(*j@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's center, geocentric horizontal parallax @code{%)*j@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent
horizontal parallax of the Moon in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{k}
@cindex Moon's center, geocentric semidiameter @code{%(k@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's center, geocentric semidiameter @code{%)k@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's center, geocentric semidiameter @code{%(*k@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's center, geocentric semidiameter @code{%)*k@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent semidiameter
of the Moon in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{l}
@cindex Moon's center, geocentric brightness @code{%(l@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's center, geocentric brightness @code{%)l@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's center, geocentric brightness @code{%(*l@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's center, geocentric brightness @code{%)*l@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent brightness
of the Moon in magnitude units
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{m}
@cindex Moon's center, geocentric phase angle @code{%(m@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's center, geocentric phase angle @code{%)m@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's center, geocentric phase angle @code{%(*m@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon's center, geocentric phase angle @code{%)*m@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent phase angle
of the Moon in range @w{0.0@dots{}1.0}
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{n}
@cindex Moon, geocentric elevation @code{%(n@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric elevation @code{%)n@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric elevation @code{%(*n@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric elevation @code{%)*n@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent elevation
of the Moon in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
Results with a negative sign signify that the Moon's center is below the
horizon at the moment, and results with a positive sign mean that the
momentary center of the Moon is above the horizon.
@item @
@item @code{o}
@cindex Moon, geocentric azimuth @code{%(o@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric azimuth @code{%)o@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric azimuth @code{%)*o@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric azimuth @code{%(*o@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent azimuth
of the Moon in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{p}
@cindex Moon, geocentric declination @code{%(p@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric declination @code{%)p@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric declination @code{%(*p@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric declination @code{%)*p@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent declination
of the Moon in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
Results with a negative sign signify that the Moon's center is below the
celestial equator at the moment, and results with a positive sign mean that
the momentary center of the Moon is above the celestial equator.
@item @
@item @code{q}
@cindex Moon, geocentric ecliptic longitude @code{%(q@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric ecliptic longitude @code{%)q@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric ecliptic longitude @code{%(*q@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric ecliptic longitude @code{%)*q@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent ecliptic longitude
of the Moon in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{r}
@cindex Moon, geocentric ecliptic latitude @code{%(r@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric ecliptic latitude @code{%)r@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric ecliptic latitude @code{%(*r@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric ecliptic latitude @code{%)*r@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent ecliptic latitude
of the Moon in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
Results with a negative sign signify that the Moon's center is North
of the ecliptic at the moment, and results with a positive sign mean
that the momentary center of the Moon is South of the ecliptic.
@item @
@item @code{s}
@cindex Moon, geocentric right ascension @code{%(s@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric right ascension @code{%)s@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric right ascension @code{%(*s@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric right ascension @code{%)*s@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent right ascension
of the Moon as time value in hours and minutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{t}
@cindex Moon, geocentric distance @code{%(t@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric distance @code{%)t@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric distance @code{%(*t@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric distance @code{%)*t@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent distance
of the Moon from the Earth in mean Earth equator radii
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{u}
@cindex Moon, geocentric elongation @code{%(u@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric elongation @code{%)u@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric elongation @code{%(*u@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric elongation @code{%)*u@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent elongation
of the Moon in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{v}
@cindex Moon, delta-t @code{%(v@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, delta-t @code{%)v@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, delta-t @code{%(*v@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, delta-t @code{%)*v@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Delta-t, Moon
@cindex Terrestrial Dynamical time (TDT)
@cindex Ephemeris time (ET)
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate @dfn{delta-t} in seconds
as it happen at civil midnight time.
Delta-t is the difference between the Terrestrial Dynamical time
(abbreviated by @acronym{TDT}), that was formerly known as @emph{Ephemeris
time} (abbreviated by @acronym{ET}), and the Universal time (@acronym{UT}).
Thus, @w{@samp{delta-t @equiv{} TDT - UT}}@.
@item @
@item @code{w}
@cindex Moon, local sidereal time @code{%(w@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, local sidereal time @code{%)w@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, local sidereal time @code{%(*w@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, local sidereal time @code{%)*w@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sidereal time, Moon
@cindex Star day
@cindex Star time
@cindex Vernal equinox point on the ecliptic
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate, apparent location oriented
@dfn{sidereal time} (local sidereal time (@acronym{LAST}),
also known as @emph{local star time}) in hours and minutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
A @dfn{star day} is the period between two consecutive upper culminations
of the vernal equinox point on the ecliptic in the meridian of the observer's
location.  Therefore, the local @dfn{star time} is the momentary period,
which is past between the last upper culmination of the vernal equinox
point in the meridian of the observer's location (the momentary hour angle
of the vernal equinox point), thus the right ascension of the stars in the
observer's meridian at the moment.
@item @
@item @code{x}
@cindex Moon, base time @code{%(x@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, base time @code{%)x@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, base time @code{%(*x@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, base time @code{%)*x@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Base time of astronomical functions, output
@cindex Output of base time of astronomical functions
@cindex Universal time (UTC)
@cindex Greenwich Mean time (GMT)
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Outputs the base time as time value in hours and minutes,
for which the dynamical, i.e.@: depending on the respective clocktime,
astronomical data and times of the Moon are calculated.
Without a given @w{@option{--time-offset=@var{argument}}} option,
the astronomical data and times of the Moon are always calculated
for 0 @w{o'clock} Universal time @w{(UTC/GMT)}@.
@xref{x-time-offset, , Calendar option @option{--time-offset=@var{argument}}},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{y}
@cindex Moon, Julian date @code{%(y@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, Julian date @code{%)y@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, Julian date @code{%(*y@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, Julian date @code{%)*y@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate Julian date in days
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@xref{Julian day number},
for further information about the Julian date.
@item @
@item @code{z}
@cindex Moon, Julian Ephemeris date @code{%(z@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, Julian Ephemeris date @code{%)z@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, Julian Ephemeris date @code{%(*z@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, Julian Ephemeris date @code{%)*z@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Julian Ephemeris date
@cindex Ephemeris date, Julian
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate @dfn{Julian Ephemeris date},
thus a Julian date that is corrected by @emph{delta-t}, in days
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{A}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta topocentric elevation @code{%(A@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta topocentric elevation @code{%)A@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta topocentric elevation @code{%(*A@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta topocentric elevation @code{%)*A@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the difference of the approximate topocentric,
apparent elevation of Moon and Sun (delta),
at which the Moon is used as the reference point,
in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
Results with a negative sign signify that the momentary center of the Moon is
at an elevation that is below the momentary elevation of the Sun's center;
thus the Moon is lower than the Sun.
Results with a positive sign signify that the momentary center of the Moon is
at an elevation that is above the momentary elevation of the Sun's center;
thus the Moon is higher than the Sun.
@item @
@item @code{B}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta topocentric azimuth @code{%(B@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta topocentric azimuth @code{%)B@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta topocentric azimuth @code{%(*B@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta topocentric azimuth @code{%)*B@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the difference of the approximate topocentric,
apparent azimuth of Moon and Sun (delta),
at which the Moon is used as the reference point,
in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
The result specifies the horizontal angular distance, by which the momentary
center of the Moon is distant from the momentary Sun's center, and that
measured at the vertical circles that pass the Moon and the North point
and the Sun and the North point.
Results with a negative sign signify that the Sun is to the right
(clockwise) of the Moon if one looks to the Moon --- or alternatively
expressed, that the Moon is to the left (anti-clockwise) of the Sun.
Results with a positive sign signify that the Sun is to the left
(anti-clockwise) of the Moon if one looks to the Moon --- or alternatively
expressed, that the Moon is to the right (clockwise) of the Sun.
@item @
@item @code{C}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta geocentric elevation @code{%(C@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta geocentric elevation @code{%)C@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta geocentric elevation @code{%(*C@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta geocentric elevation @code{%)*C@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the difference of the approximate geocentric,
apparent elevation of Moon and Sun (delta),
at which the Moon is used as the reference point,
in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{D}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta geocentric azimuth @code{%(D@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta geocentric azimuth @code{%)D@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta geocentric azimuth @code{%(*D@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta geocentric azimuth @code{%)*D@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the difference of the approximate geocentric,
apparent azimuth of Moon and Sun (delta),
at which the Moon is used as the reference point,
in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at civil midnight time.
@item @
@item @code{E}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta topocentric elevation at standard moonrise time @code{%(E@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta topocentric elevation at standard moonrise time @code{%(*E@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{(}
@tab Calculates the difference of the approximate topocentric,
apparent elevation of Moon and Sun (delta),
at which the Moon is used as the reference point,
in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at standard rise time of the Moon.
@xref{x-Moon-standard-rise, , Standard rise time of the Moon},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{E}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta topocentric elevation at standard moonset time @code{%)E@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta topocentric elevation at standard moonset time @code{%)*E@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{)}
@tab Calculates the difference of the approximate topocentric,
apparent elevation of Moon and Sun (delta),
at which the Moon is used as the reference point,
in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at standard set time of the Moon.
@xref{x-Moon-standard-set, , Standard set time of the Moon},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{F}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta topocentric azimuth at standard moonrise time @code{%(F@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta topocentric azimuth at standard moonrise time @code{%(*F@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{(}
@tab Calculates the difference of the approximate topocentric,
apparent azimuth of Moon and Sun (delta),
at which the Moon is used as the reference point,
in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at standard rise time of the Moon.
@xref{x-Moon-standard-rise, , Standard rise time of the Moon},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{F}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta topocentric azimuth at standard moonset time @code{%)F@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta topocentric azimuth at standard moonset time @code{%)*F@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{)}
@tab Calculates the difference of the approximate topocentric,
apparent azimuth of Moon and Sun (delta),
at which the Moon is used as the reference point,
in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at standard set time of the Moon.
@xref{x-Moon-standard-set, , Standard set time of the Moon},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{G}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta geocentric elevation at standard moonrise time @code{%(G@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta geocentric elevation at standard moonrise time @code{%(*G@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{(}
@tab Calculates the difference of the approximate geocentric,
apparent elevation of Moon and Sun (delta),
at which the Moon is used as the reference point,
in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at standard rise time of the Moon.
@xref{x-Moon-standard-rise, , Standard rise time of the Moon},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{G}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta geocentric elevation at standard moonset time @code{%)G@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta geocentric elevation at standard moonset time @code{%)*G@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{)}
@tab Calculates the difference of the approximate geocentric,
apparent elevation of Moon and Sun (delta),
at which the Moon is used as the reference point,
in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at standard set time of the Moon.
@xref{x-Moon-standard-set, , Standard set time of the Moon},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{H}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta geocentric azimuth at standard moonrise time @code{%(H@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta geocentric azimuth at standard moonrise time @code{%(*H@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{(}
@tab Calculates the difference of the approximate geocentric,
apparent azimuth of Moon and Sun (delta),
at which the Moon is used as the reference point,
in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at standard rise time of the Moon.
@xref{x-Moon-standard-rise, , Standard rise time of the Moon},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{H}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta geocentric azimuth at standard moonset time @code{%)H@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta geocentric azimuth at standard moonset time @code{%)*H@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{)}
@tab Calculates the difference of the approximate geocentric,
apparent azimuth of Moon and Sun (delta),
at which the Moon is used as the reference point,
in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at standard set time of the Moon.
@xref{x-Moon-standard-set, , Standard set time of the Moon},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{I}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta astronomical midnight time @code{%(I@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta astronomical midnight time @code{%)I@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta astronomical midnight time @code{%(*I@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta astronomical midnight time @code{%)*I@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the difference of the approximate
astronomical midnight times of Moon and Sun (delta),
at which the Moon is used as the reference point,
as time value in hours and minutes
as it happen at astronomical midnight time of the Moon.
Results with a negative sign signify that the astronomical midnight time
of the Moon is earlier than the astronomical midnight time of the Sun;
thus the lunar midnight is before the solar midnight.
Results with a positive sign signify that the astronomical midnight time
of the Moon is later than the astronomical midnight time of the Sun;
thus the lunar midnight is after the solar midnight.
@xref{x-Moon-midnight, , Astronomical midnight time of the Moon},
and
@ref{x-Sun-midnight, , Astronomical midnight time of the Sun},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{J}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta astronomical noon time @code{%(J@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta astronomical noon time @code{%)J@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta astronomical noon time @code{%(*J@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta astronomical noon time @code{%)*J@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the difference of the approximate
astronomical noon times of Moon and Sun (delta),
at which the Moon is used as the reference point,
as time value in hours and minutes
as it happen at astronomical noon time of the Moon.
Results with a negative sign signify that the astronomical noon time
of the Moon is earlier than the astronomical noon time of the Sun;
thus the lunar noon is before the solar noon.
Results with a positive sign signify that the astronomical noon time
of the Moon is later than the astronomical noon time of the Sun;
thus the lunar noon is after the solar noon.
@xref{x-Moon-noon, , Astronomical noon time of the Moon},
and
@ref{x-Sun-noon, , Astronomical noon time of the Sun},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{K}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta standard rise time @code{%(K@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta standard rise time @code{%(*K@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{(}
@tab Calculates the difference of the approximate
standard rise times of Moon and Sun (delta),
at which the Moon is used as the reference point,
as time value in hours and minutes
as it happen at standard rise time of the Moon.
Results with a negative sign signify that the standard rise time
of the Moon is earlier than the standard rise time of the Sun;
thus the moonrise is before the sunrise.
Results with a positive sign signify that the standard rise time
of the Moon is later than the standard rise time of the Sun;
thus the moonrise is after the sunrise.
@xref{x-Moon-standard-rise, , Standard rise time of the Moon},
and
@ref{x-Sun-standard-rise, , Standard rise time of the Sun},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{K}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta standard set time @code{%)K@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta standard set time @code{%)*K@var{argument}} special text
@tab @code{)}
@tab Calculates the difference of the approximate
standard set times of Moon and Sun (delta),
at which the Moon is used as the reference point,
as time value in hours and minutes
as it happen at standard set time of the Moon.
Results with a negative sign signify that the standard set time
of the Moon is earlier than the standard set time of the Sun;
thus the moonset is before the sunset.
Results with a positive sign signify that the standard set time
of the Moon is later than the standard set time of the Sun;
thus the moonset is after the sunset.
@xref{x-Moon-standard-set, , Standard set time of the Moon},
and
@ref{x-Sun-standard-set, , Standard set time of the Sun},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{L}
@cindex Moon, topocentric elevation at Moon's astronomical midnight time @code{%(L@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric elevation at Moon's astronomical midnight time @code{%)L@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric elevation at Moon's astronomical midnight time @code{%(*L@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric elevation at Moon's astronomical midnight time @code{%)*L@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, midnight height topocentric
@cindex Midnight height topocentric, Moon
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent elevation
of the Moon in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at astronomical midnight time of the Moon
(topocentric @dfn{midnight height})@.
@xref{x-Moon-midnight, , Astronomical midnight time of the Moon},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{M}
@cindex Moon, topocentric phase angle at Moon's astronomical midnight time @code{%(M@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric phase angle at Moon's astronomical midnight time @code{%)M@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric phase angle at Moon's astronomical midnight time @code{%(*M@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric phase angle at Moon's astronomical midnight time @code{%)*M@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, midnight phase angle topocentric
@cindex Midnight phase angle topocentric, Moon
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent phase angle
of the Moon in range @w{0.0@dots{}1.0}
as it happen at astronomical midnight time of the Moon
(topocentric @dfn{midnight phase angle})@.
@xref{x-Moon-midnight, , Astronomical midnight time of the Moon},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{N}
@cindex Moon, topocentric elevation at Moon's astronomical noon time @code{%(N@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric elevation at Moon's astronomical noon time @code{%)N@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric elevation at Moon's astronomical noon time @code{%(*N@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric elevation at Moon's astronomical noon time @code{%)*N@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, noon height topocentric
@cindex Noon height topocentric, Moon
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent elevation
of the Moon in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at astronomical noon time of the Moon
(topocentric @dfn{noon height})@.
@xref{x-Moon-noon, , Astronomical noon time of the Moon},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{O}
@cindex Moon, topocentric phase angle at Moon's astronomical noon time @code{%(O@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric phase angle at Moon's astronomical noon time @code{%)O@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric phase angle at Moon's astronomical noon time @code{%(*O@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric phase angle at Moon's astronomical noon time @code{%)*O@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, noon phase angle topocentric
@cindex Noon phase angle topocentric, Moon
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent phase angle
of the Moon in range @w{0.0@dots{}1.0}
as it happen at astronomical noon time of the Moon
(topocentric @dfn{noon phase angle})@.
@xref{x-Moon-noon, , Astronomical noon time of the Moon},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{P}
@cindex Moon, topocentric elevation at standard rise time @code{%(P@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric elevation at standard rise time @code{%(*P@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, rise height topocentric
@cindex Rise height topocentric, Moon
@tab @code{(}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent elevation
of the Moon in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at standard rise time of the Moon
(topocentric @dfn{rise height})@.
@xref{x-Moon-standard-rise, , Standard rise time of the Moon},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{P}
@cindex Moon, topocentric elevation at standard set time @code{%)P@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric elevation at standard set time @code{%)*P@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, set height topocentric
@cindex Set height topocentric, Moon
@tab @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent elevation
of the Moon in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at standard set time of the Moon
(topocentric @dfn{set height})@.
@xref{x-Moon-standard-set, , Standard set time of the Moon},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{Q}
@cindex Moon, topocentric azimuth at standard rise time @code{%(Q@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric azimuth at standard rise time @code{%(*Q@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, rise azimuth topocentric
@cindex Rise azimuth topocentric, Moon
@cindex Moon, rise width topocentric
@cindex Rise width topocentric, Moon
@tab @code{(}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent azimuth
of the Moon in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at standard rise time of the Moon
(topocentric @dfn{rise azimuth})@.  The horizontal angular distance
between the topocentric rise azimuth and the East direction is also
known as the topocentric @dfn{rise width} of the Moon.
@xref{x-Moon-standard-rise, , Standard rise time of the Moon},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{Q}
@cindex Moon, topocentric azimuth at standard set time @code{%)Q@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric azimuth at standard set time @code{%)*Q@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, set azimuth topocentric
@cindex Set azimuth topocentric, Moon
@cindex Moon, set width topocentric
@cindex Set width topocentric, Moon
@tab @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent azimuth
of the Moon in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at standard set time of the Moon
(topocentric @dfn{set azimuth})@.  The horizontal angular distance
between the topocentric set azimuth and the West direction is also
known as the topocentric @dfn{set width} of the Moon.
@xref{x-Moon-standard-set, , Standard set time of the Moon},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{R}
@cindex Moon, topocentric phase angle at standard rise time @code{%(R@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric phase angle at standard rise time @code{%(*R@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, rise phase angle topocentric
@cindex Rise phase angle topocentric, Moon
@tab @code{(}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent phase angle
of the Moon in range @w{0.0@dots{}1.0}
as it happen at standard rise time of the Moon
(topocentric @dfn{rise phase angle})@.
@xref{x-Moon-standard-rise, , Standard rise time of the Moon},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{R}
@cindex Moon, topocentric phase angle at standard set time @code{%)R@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric phase angle at standard set time @code{%)*R@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, set phase angle topocentric
@cindex Set phase angle topocentric, Moon
@tab @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate topocentric, apparent phase angle
of the Moon in range @w{0.0@dots{}1.0}
as it happen at standard set time of the Moon
(topocentric @dfn{set phase angle})@.
@xref{x-Moon-standard-set, , Standard set time of the Moon},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{S}
@cindex Moon, geocentric elevation at Moon's astronomical midnight time @code{%(S@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric elevation at Moon's astronomical midnight time @code{%)S@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric elevation at Moon's astronomical midnight time @code{%(*S@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric elevation at Moon's astronomical midnight time @code{%)*S@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, midnight height geocentric
@cindex Midnight height geocentric, Moon
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent elevation
of the Moon in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at astronomical midnight time of the Moon
(geocentric @dfn{midnight height})@.
@xref{x-Moon-midnight, , Astronomical midnight time of the Moon},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{T}
@cindex Moon, geocentric phase angle at Moon's astronomical midnight time @code{%(T@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric phase angle at Moon's astronomical midnight time @code{%)T@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric phase angle at Moon's astronomical midnight time @code{%(*T@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric phase angle at Moon's astronomical midnight time @code{%)*T@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, midnight phase angle geocentric
@cindex Midnight phase angle geocentric, Moon
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent phase angle
of the Moon in range @w{0.0@dots{}1.0}
as it happen at astronomical midnight time of the Moon
(geocentric @dfn{midnight phase angle})@.
@xref{x-Moon-midnight, , Astronomical midnight time of the Moon},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{U}
@cindex Moon, geocentric elevation at Moon's astronomical noon time @code{%(U@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric elevation at Moon's astronomical noon time @code{%)U@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric elevation at Moon's astronomical noon time @code{%(*U@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric elevation at Moon's astronomical noon time @code{%)*U@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, noon height geocentric
@cindex Noon height geocentric, Moon
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent elevation
of the Moon in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at astronomical noon time of the Moon
(geocentric @dfn{noon height})@.
@xref{x-Moon-noon, , Astronomical noon time of the Moon},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{V}
@cindex Moon, geocentric phase angle at Moon's astronomical noon time @code{%(V@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric phase angle at Moon's astronomical noon time @code{%)V@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric phase angle at Moon's astronomical noon time @code{%(*V@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric phase angle at Moon's astronomical noon time @code{%)*V@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, noon phase angle geocentric
@cindex Noon phase angle geocentric, Moon
@tab @code{(}, @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent phase angle
of the Moon in range @w{0.0@dots{}1.0}
as it happen at astronomical noon time of the Moon
(geocentric @dfn{noon phase angle})@.
@xref{x-Moon-noon, , Astronomical noon time of the Moon},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{W}
@cindex Moon, geocentric elevation at standard rise time @code{%(W@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric elevation at standard rise time @code{%(*W@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, rise height geocentric
@cindex Rise height geocentric, Moon
@tab @code{(}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent elevation
of the Moon in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at standard rise time of the Moon
(geocentric @dfn{rise height})@.
@xref{x-Moon-standard-rise, , Standard rise time of the Moon},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{W}
@cindex Moon, geocentric elevation at standard set time @code{%)W@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric elevation at standard set time @code{%)*W@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, set height geocentric
@cindex Set height geocentric, Moon
@tab @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent elevation
of the Moon in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at standard set time of the Moon
(geocentric @dfn{set height})@.
@xref{x-Moon-standard-set, , Standard set time of the Moon},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{X}
@cindex Moon, geocentric azimuth at standard rise time @code{%(X@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric azimuth at standard rise time @code{%(*X@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, rise azimuth geocentric
@cindex Rise azimuth geocentric, Moon
@cindex Moon, rise width geocentric
@cindex Rise width geocentric, Moon
@tab @code{(}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent azimuth
of the Moon in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at standard rise time of the Moon
(geocentric @dfn{rise azimuth})@.  The horizontal angular distance
between the geocentric rise azimuth and the East direction is also
known as the geocentric @dfn{rise width} of the Moon.
@xref{x-Moon-standard-rise, , Standard rise time of the Moon},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{X}
@cindex Moon, geocentric azimuth at standard set time @code{%)X@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric azimuth at standard set time @code{%)*X@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, set azimuth geocentric
@cindex Set azimuth geocentric, Moon
@cindex Moon, set width geocentric
@cindex Set width geocentric, Moon
@tab @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent azimuth
of the Moon in degrees and arcminutes
as it happen at standard set time of the Moon
(geocentric @dfn{set azimuth})@.  The horizontal angular distance
between the geocentric set azimuth and the West direction is also
known as the geocentric @dfn{set width} of the Moon.
@xref{x-Moon-standard-set, , Standard set time of the Moon},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{Y}
@cindex Moon, geocentric phase angle at standard rise time @code{%(Y@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric phase angle at standard rise time @code{%(*Y@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, rise phase angle geocentric
@cindex Rise phase angle geocentric, Moon
@tab @code{(}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent phase angle
of the Moon in range @w{0.0@dots{}1.0}
as it happen at standard rise time of the Moon
(geocentric @dfn{rise phase angle})@.
@xref{x-Moon-standard-rise, , Standard rise time of the Moon},
for further details.
@item @
@item @code{Y}
@cindex Moon, geocentric phase angle at standard set time @code{%)Y@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric phase angle at standard set time @code{%)*Y@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, set phase angle geocentric
@cindex Set phase angle geocentric, Moon
@tab @code{)}
@tab Calculates the approximate geocentric, apparent phase angle
of the Moon in range @w{0.0@dots{}1.0}
as it happen at standard set time of the Moon
(geocentric @dfn{set phase angle})@.
@xref{x-Moon-standard-set, , Standard set time of the Moon},
for further details.
@end multitable
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

@cindex Default mode, Moon data and times
@cindex Moon data and times, default mode
If no @var{mode} is given, Gcal automatically uses that mode, which is
enabled by the mode character @samp{5}@.  If a mode character is given
that is not according to one of the @w{@samp{0}@dots{}@samp{9}},
@w{@samp{a}@dots{}@samp{z}} and @w{@samp{A}@dots{}@samp{Y}} characters,
Gcal also automatically uses that mode, which is enabled by the mode
character @samp{5}@.

@cindex Type of representation of Moon data and times
@cindex Moon data and times, type of representation
@cindex Style of representation of Moon data and times
@cindex Moon data and times, style of representation
Depending on the selected mode, Gcal represents the Moon oriented special
texts using the same types and styles as they are used by the Sun oriented
special texts, these are analogously valid!
@xref{x-Sun-representation, Representation of the Sun oriented special texts},
for the detailed description of the different types of representation
used by the Sun oriented special texts, which are likewise valid for
the Moon oriented special texts.

@cindex @acronym{ISO}-6709:1983 co-ordinate
@cindex Co-ordinate, @acronym{ISO}-6709:1983
@cindex Timezone
The @var{argument} the Moon oriented special texts must have is exactly
equivalent the argument the Sun oriented special texts must have!
@xref{x-Sun-arguments, , Arguments of the Sun oriented special texts},
for the detailed description of the components of the @var{argument}
which also has to be given to the Moon oriented special texts.

The following table informs you about which type of representation is caused
by a mode.  The previously defined numbering scheme, as it has been used
for the introduction of the types of representation, is used as key value
in the column that holds the type of representation.  The table also
contains a column that shows whether a mode enables dynamical values,
i.e.@: values that are depending on the respective clocktime (if you use the
@w{@option{--time-offset=@var{argument}}} option, you can change the respective
clocktime that is used for calculating such values)@.  In a next table column,
it is listed whether the given co-ordinate of the location influences the
determination of a value, and the last column of the table gives you the
information whether a given timezone value affects the values
determination:
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

@multitable @columnfractions .1 .3 .2 .2 .2
@tbindex Representation types of the Moon oriented special texts
@tbindex Moon oriented special texts, representation types
@cindex Table of representation types of the Moon oriented special texts
@cindex Moon oriented special texts, table of representation types
@item @strong{Mode}
@tab @strong{Representation Type}
@tab @strong{Dynamical}
@tab @strong{Co-ordinate}
@tab @strong{Timezone}
@item @
@item @code{0}
@tab 3
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{1}
@tab 3
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{2}
@tab 3 or 4
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{3}
@tab 3 or 4
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{4}
@tab 3 or 4
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{5}
@tab 3 or 4
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{6}
@tab 6
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{7}
@tab 6
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{8}
@tab 2
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{9}
@tab 1 or 1b
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{a}
@tab 7
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{b}
@tab 6
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{c}
@tab 7
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{d}
@tab 6
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{e}
@tab 7
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{f}
@tab 4
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{g}
@tab 1 or 1a
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{h}
@tab 6
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{i}
@tab 6
@tab Yes
@tab No
@tab No
@item @code{j}
@tab 6
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{k}
@tab 6
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{l}
@tab 2
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{m}
@tab 1 or 1b
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{n}
@tab 7
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{o}
@tab 6
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{p}
@tab 7
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{q}
@tab 6
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{r}
@tab 7
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{s}
@tab 4
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{t}
@tab 1 or 1a
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{u}
@tab 6
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{v}
@tab 2
@tab Yes
@tab No
@tab No
@item @code{w}
@tab 3
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{x}
@tab 3
@tab Yes
@tab No
@tab No
@item @code{y}
@tab 1
@tab Yes
@tab No
@tab No
@item @code{z}
@tab 1
@tab Yes
@tab No
@tab No
@item @code{A}
@tab 7
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{B}
@tab 7
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{C}
@tab 7
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{D}
@tab 7
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{E}
@tab 7
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{F}
@tab 7
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{G}
@tab 7
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{H}
@tab 7
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{I}
@tab 5
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{J}
@tab 5
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{K}
@tab 5
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{L}
@tab 7
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{M}
@tab 1 or 1b
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{N}
@tab 7
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{O}
@tab 1 or 1b
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{P}
@tab 7
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{Q}
@tab 6
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{R}
@tab 1 or 1b
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{S}
@tab 7
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{T}
@tab 1 or 1b
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{U}
@tab 7
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{V}
@tab 1 or 1b
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{W}
@tab 7
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{X}
@tab 6
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@item @code{Y}
@tab 1 or 1b
@tab No
@tab Yes
@tab Yes
@end multitable
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

@noindent
And now some examples to these special texts:

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Moonrise at %(+5158+00738,120 @ in MS, BRD}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Moonrise at 12:21 in MS, BRD}},
in case the actual system date is the 1st June 1998@.
@end quotation

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Moonset at %)*5+5158+00738,120 @ in MS, BRD}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Moonset at 01:53am in MS, BRD}},
in case the actual system date is the 1st June 1998@.
@end quotation

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Moon visible %[5+5158+00738,120 @ in MS, BRD}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Moon visible 13h32' in MS, BRD}},
in case the actual system date is the 1st June 1998@.
@end quotation

@need 1000
@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Moon non-visible %]*+5158+00738,120 @ in MS, BRD}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Moon non-visible 10.469 in MS, BRD}},
in case the actual system date is the 1st June 1998@.
@end quotation

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Moon azimuth 0 o'clock=%(*a+5158+00738,120 @ in MS, BRD}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Moon azimuth 0 o'clock=267d37' in MS, BRD}},
in case the actual system date is the 1st June 1998@.
@end quotation

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Moonphase %(x+00+000 =%(*m+5158+00738,120 % in MS, BRD}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Moonphase +16h00'=45.248% in MS, BRD}},
in case you call Gcal with the @w{@option{--time-offset=16:}} option
and the actual system date is the 1st June 1998@.
@end quotation

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{Julian date at %(x+00+000 =%(y+00+000}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{Julian date at +10h15'=2450965.927}},
in case you call Gcal with the @w{@option{--time-offset=10:15}} option
and the actual system date is the 1st June 1998@.
@end quotation
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

@cindex Reference systems used, Moon oriented special texts
@cindex Moon oriented special texts, reference systems used
@cindex Limitations, Moon oriented special texts
@cindex Moon oriented special texts, limitations
Here is a list that reports about the used reference systems in a short
manner, describes other aspects that are unmentioned now, and informs
about the lacks and limitations that are existing for the Moon oriented
special texts:

@itemize @bullet
@item
All astronomical calculations are based on methods that use ---astronomically
seen--- low-precision elements, which of course is shown in the precision of
the results that are caused by them.  Nevertheless in most cases, these results
can be treated as more as sufficiently precise if one measures their practical
use.

@item
All azimuth and elevation values are always referring to the center of the
respective astronomical object, except the case, it is stated otherwise.

@need 500
@item
The base point of azimuth values, right ascension values and other ecliptic
co-ordinate values is always measured clockwise relative to the geographical,
true North (not the magnetic North as shown by a compass), where angular
values for the North direction are both denoted as 0 degree and 360 degree.

@item
All topocentrically based azimuth and elevation values are always corrected
by the amount of atmospheric refraction.  Such a kind of correction is always
done if the center of the respective astronomical object is above 2 degrees
below the horizon.

@item
Generally, the rise and set times of the Moon cannot be precisely predicted,
because depending on unpredictable atmospheric conditions, i.e.@: the local
weather conditions as they appear during these times change the amount of
atmospheric refraction at the horizon, so that the precalculated rise and
set times may throughout be in error by a minute or more.

@cindex Lunar Arctic Circle
@item
The accuracy of rise and set computations decreases again at high latitudes,
i.e.@: within in the lunar Arctic Circle.  There, small variations in
atmospheric refraction can change the time of moonrise or moonset by many
minutes, since the Moon intersects the horizon at a very shallow angle.
For the same reason, at high latitudes, the effects of observer height
and local topography are magnified and can substantially change the times
of the phenomena actually observed, or even whether the phenomena are
observed to occur at all.

@item
It is possible that calculations, which are done for locations within the
lunar Arctic Circle, sometimes result in the wrongly @w{**.**} text instead
of the more precisely @w{++:++} or @w{--:--} texts that are used for marking
special events.  Unfortunately, therefore, then the reason why the Moon does
not rise or set is no longer clearly evident, respectively, it is possible
to get the false suggestion that the reason for non-rising or non-setting
of the Moon is caused by just the one day within a synodic month, at which
the Moon does not rise or set anyhow.  Unfortunately, it is just only obvious
@strong{that} the Moon does not rise or set during this day.
@end itemize

@noindent
@strong{Please also note the following references:}

@itemize @bullet
@item
@xref{x-precise, , Fixed dates option @option{--precise}},
how to obtain a more precise representation of the values
which are cause by these special texts.

@item
And note
@ref{x-time-offset, , Calendar option @option{--time-offset=@var{argument}}},
how to change the clocktime, for which the dynamical, i.e.@: depending on
the respective clocktime, Moon oriented special texts are calculated.

@item
Likewise, see
@ref{x-cycle-end, , Fixed dates option @option{--cycle-end=@var{argument}}},
how the dynamical, i.e.@: depending on the respective clocktime, Moon oriented
special texts are calculated for a series of clocktimes for the current day.

@item
Furthermore, see
@ref{x-adjust-value, , Fixed dates option @option{--adjust-value=@var{argument}}},
how to change the reference altitude that is used to calculate the rise and
set times.

@item
And last, note
@ref{x-atmosphere, , Fixed dates option @option{--atmosphere=@var{air-pressure}@r{[,}@var{temperature}@r{]}}},
how to change the base data of the atmosphere that affects the calculation
of the Moon oriented special texts.
@end itemize

All Moon oriented special texts @strong{must} always be trailed by a
@emph{whitespace} character which is removed in output!

@node Contents of Environment variable, , Moon data, Replacements with other argument
@appendixsubsubsec Environment variable @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}-@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text
@cindex @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}-@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text, environment variable
@cindex Special text @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}-@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}}, environment varibale
@cindex Environment variable @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}-@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text

@code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}-@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} references the contents
of an @strong{environment variable}, e.g.@::

@quotation
The text @w{@samp{I am `%-USER '-user}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{I am `guest'-user}},
in case you logged-in as guest on your system.
@end quotation

This special text @strong{must} always be trailed by a @emph{whitespace}
character which is removed in output!

@node Replacements without any argument, , Replacements with other argument, Replacements
@appendixsubsec Replacements without any argument @code{%@var{?}} special texts
@cindex @code{%@var{?}} special texts, replacements without any argument
@cindex Special texts @code{%@var{?}}, replacements without any argument
@cindex Replacements without any argument @code{%@var{?}} special texts

@menu
* Other difference values::
* Highlighting::
@end menu

Apart from further useful difference values, the text of a fixed date can
be provided with different texts used for highlighting.

@node Other difference values, Highlighting, Replacements without any argument, Replacements without any argument
@appendixsubsubsec Difference value @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}} special texts
@cindex @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}} special texts, difference value
@cindex Special texts @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}}, difference value
@cindex Difference value @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}} special texts

The use of the other difference values as listed here is to calculate
distance values between two dates.  In case these special texts are
directly lead by a @samp{-} character, e.g.@: @samp{-%d}, Gcal switches
the sign of the computed value.

@cindex Depreciation of special characters
@cindex Special characters, depreciation
@cindex Depreciation character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} depreciation character
@cindex Protection of special characters
@cindex Special characters, protection
@cindex Protection character, @samp{\}
@cindex @samp{\} protection character
You may depreciate the special meaning of the @samp{-} character
---in case this character itself is needed--- by placing a @samp{\}
(backslash) character before it, e.g.@: @samp{\-}@.  If you need the
@samp{\-} characters themselves, you have to protect the @samp{\}
(backslash) character by another @samp{\} (backslash) character,
e.g.@: @samp{\\-}@.

The following other difference values @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}}
special texts are respected:

@table @code
@item %d
@cindex @code{%d} special text, relative day number
@cindex Special text @code{%d}, relative day number
@cindex Relative day number @code{%d} special text
Specifies the current respectively queried @strong{day}
relative to the actual system date (@equiv{}today), e.g.@::

@quotation
The resource file line @w{@samp{0 %d days gone}}
will be expanded to@*
@w{@expansion{} @samp{-10 days gone}},
in case you call Gcal with the @w{@option{-c10-}} option and no command.
@end quotation

@item %w
@cindex @code{%w} special text, relative week number
@cindex Special text @code{%w}, relative week number
@cindex Relative week number @code{%w} special text
Specifies the current respectively queried @strong{week} relative to
the actual system date (@equiv{}today)@.  Started weeks are counted
as complete weeks.

@item %m
@cindex @code{%m} special text, relative month number
@cindex Special text @code{%m}, relative month number
@cindex Relative month number @code{%m} special text
Specifies the current respectively queried @strong{month} relative to
the actual system date (@equiv{}today)@.  Started months are counted
as complete months.

@item %y
@cindex @code{%y} special text, relative year number
@cindex Special text @code{%y}, relative year number
@cindex Relative year number @code{%y} special text
Specifies the current respectively queried @strong{year} relative to
the actual system date (@equiv{}today)@.  Started years are counted
as complete years.  This special text @strong{must} always be trailed by
a @emph{whitespace} character which is removed in output!
@end table

An example:

Supposing, the actual system date is the 4th September 1999@.  To calculate,
how many days, weeks, months and years are between the actual system date
and the birthday of a person, who is born on 21st September 1962, Gcal can
be called as follows:

@example
@group
@cartouche
$ gcal -f/dev/null -Ux -u -#'19620921 %y %m %w %d~' 1962
@print{}
@print{} -37 -444 -1928 -13497
@print{}
$ gcal -f/dev/null -Ux -u -#'19620921 \\-%y \-%m %w -%d~' 1962
@print{}
@print{} \--37 --444 -1928 13497
@print{}
$ gcal -f/dev/null -Ux -u -#'00000904 %y %m %w %d~' %19620921 1999
@print{}
@print{} 37 444 1928 13497
@print{}
$ gcal -f/dev/null -Ux -u -#'00000904 %y %B19620921' %19620921 1962
@print{}
@print{} 37 36
@end cartouche
@end group
@end example

@noindent
Please do not confound the relative year number @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}y}
special text with the age value @code{%B} special text
(@pxref{x-Age-value, , Age value @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}B@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text})@.
The @code{%y} special text counts started years as complete years,
while the @code{%B} special text does not.

@need 2000
@node Highlighting, , Other difference values, Replacements without any argument
@appendixsubsubsec Highlighting @code{%@var{?}} special texts
@cindex @code{%@var{?}} special texts, highlighting
@cindex Special texts @code{%@var{?}}, highlighting
@cindex Highlighting @code{%@var{?}} special texts

The following highlighting @code{%@var{?}} special texts
are respected:

@table @code
@item %1
@cindex @code{%1} special text, start of highlighting sequence 1
@cindex Special text @code{%1}, start of highlighting sequence 1
@cindex Start of highlighting sequence 1 @code{%1} special text
@code{%1} is replaced by the starting highlighting sequence respectively
the starting marking character that is used for highlighting the actual day
(@pxref{x-highlighting, , Global option @option{--highlighting=@var{text}}})@.
This attains, that all succeeding text of the line after this special text is
displayed in the same way as the highlighted respectively marked actual day.
@code{%1} is used together with the @code{%2} special text, which turns off
this enabled highlighting sequence respectively produces the ending marking
character.  If a @code{%1} text is not succeeded by a @code{%2} text on the
line, Gcal automatically inserts such a @code{%2} text at the end of the line.

For example:

@example
@group
Only %1THIS%2 word is highlighted in this line.
%1This text is highlighted up to%2 here.
All from %1here up to the end of the line is highlighted.
@end group
@end example

@item %2
@cindex @code{%2} special text, end of highlighting sequence 1
@cindex Special text @code{%2}, end of highlighting sequence 1
@cindex End of highlighting sequence 1 @code{%2} special text
@code{%2} is replaced by the ending highlighting sequence respectively
the ending marking character that is used for highlighting the actual
day.  This attains, that a possibly active highlighting according to
the actual day is turned off respectively an ending marking character
is produced.  @code{%2} is used together with the @code{%1} special text.
The @code{%2} text has no affect if no preceding @code{%1} text was
found on the line.

@item %3
@cindex @code{%3} special text, start of highlighting sequence 2
@cindex Special text @code{%3}, start of highlighting sequence 2
@cindex Start of highlighting sequence 2 @code{%3} special text
@code{%3} is replaced by the starting highlighting sequence respectively
the starting marking character that is used for highlighting a holiday,
(@pxref{x-highlighting, , Global option @option{--highlighting=@var{text}}})@.
This attains, that all succeeding text of the line after this special text
is displayed in the same way as the highlighted respectively marked holiday.
@code{%3} is used together with the @code{%4} special text, which turns off
this enabled highlighting sequence respectively produces the ending marking
character.  If a @code{%3} text is not succeeded by a @code{%4} text on the
line, Gcal automatically inserts such a @code{%4} text at the end of the line.

For example:

@example
@group
Only %3THIS%4 word is highlighted in this line.
%3This text is highlighted up to%4 here.
All from %3here up to the end of the line is highlighted.
@end group
@end example

@item %4
@cindex @code{%4} special text, end of highlighting sequence 2
@cindex Special text @code{%4}, end of highlighting sequence 2
@cindex End of highlighting sequence 2 @code{%4} special text
@code{%4} is replaced by the ending highlighting sequence respectively
the ending marking character that is used for highlighting a holiday.
This attains, that a possibly active highlighting according to a holiday
is turned off respectively an ending marking character is produced.
@code{%4} is used together with the @code{%3} special text.  The @code{%4}
text has no affect if no preceding @code{%3} text was found on the line.

@item %5
@cindex @code{%5} special text, start of highlighting sequence 1
@cindex Special text @code{%5}, start of highlighting sequence 1
@cindex Start of highlighting sequence 1 @code{%5} special text
@code{%5} is replaced by the starting highlighting sequence respectively
the starting marking character that is used for highlighting the actual day
if a fixed date is on today's date,
(@pxref{x-highlighting, , Global option @option{--highlighting=@var{text}}})@.
This attains, that all succeeding text of the line after this special text is
displayed in the same way as the highlighted respectively marked actual day.
@code{%5} is used together with the @code{%6} special text, which turns off
this enabled highlighting sequence respectively produces the ending marking
character.  If a @code{%5} text is not succeeded by a @code{%6} text on the
line, Gcal automatically inserts such a @code{%6} text at the end of the line.

@item %6
@cindex @code{%6} special text, end of highlighting sequence 1
@cindex Special text @code{%6}, end of highlighting sequence 1
@cindex End of highlighting sequence 1 @code{%6} special text
@code{%6} is replaced by the ending highlighting sequence respectively
the ending marking character that is used for highlighting the actual
day if a fixed date is on today's date.  This attains, that a possibly
active highlighting according to the actual day is turned off respectively
an ending marking character is produced.  @code{%6} is used together with
the @code{%5} special text.  The @code{%6} text has no affect if no
preceding @code{%5} text was found on the line.

@item %7
@cindex @code{%7} special text, start of highlighting sequence 2
@cindex Special text @code{%7}, start of highlighting sequence 2
@cindex Start of highlighting sequence 2 @code{%7} special text
@code{%7} is replaced by the starting highlighting sequence respectively
the starting marking character that is used for highlighting a holiday
if a fixed date is on a legal holiday date,
(@pxref{x-highlighting, , Global option @option{--highlighting=@var{text}}})@.
This attains, that all succeeding text of the line after this special text
is displayed in the same way as the highlighted respectively marked holiday.
@code{%7} is used together with the @code{%8} special text, which turns off
this enabled highlighting sequence respectively produces the ending marking
character.  If a @code{%7} text is not succeeded by a @code{%8} text on the
line, Gcal automatically inserts such a @code{%8} text at the end of the line.

@item %8
@cindex @code{%8} special text, end of highlighting sequence 2
@cindex Special text @code{%8}, end of highlighting sequence 2
@cindex End of highlighting sequence 2 @code{%8} special text
@code{%8} is replaced by the ending highlighting sequence respectively
the ending marking character that is used for highlighting a holiday if
a fixed date is on a legal holiday date.  This attains, that a possibly
active highlighting according to a holiday is turned off respectively an
ending marking character is produced.  @code{%8} is used together with the
@code{%7} special text.  The @code{%8} text has no affect if no preceding
@code{%7} text was found on the line.

@item %9
@cindex @code{%9} special text, start of highlighting sequence 1 or 2
@cindex Special text @code{%9}, start of highlighting sequence 1 or 2
@cindex Start of highlighting sequence 1 or 2 @code{%9} special text
@code{%9} is replaced by the starting highlighting sequence respectively the
starting marking character that is used for highlighting the actual day if a
fixed date is on today's date; otherwise @code{%9} is replaced by the starting
highlighting sequence respectively the starting marking character that is used
for highlighting a holiday if a fixed date is on a legal holiday date,
(@pxref{x-highlighting, , Global option @option{--highlighting=@var{text}}})@.
This attains, that all succeeding text of the line after this special text
is displayed in the same way as the highlighted respectively marked actual
day or holiday.  @code{%9} is used together with the @code{%0} special text,
which turns off this enabled highlighting sequence respectively produces
the ending marking character.  If a @code{%9} text is not succeeded by a
@code{%0} text on the line, Gcal automatically inserts such a @code{%0}
text at the end of the line.

@item %0
@cindex @code{%0} special text, end of highlighting sequence 1 or 2
@cindex Special text @code{%0}, end of highlighting sequence 1 or 2
@cindex End of highlighting sequence 1 or 2 @code{%0} special text
@code{%0} is replaced by the ending highlighting sequence respectively the
ending marking character that is used for highlighting the actual day if a
fixed date is on today's date; otherwise @code{%0} is replaced by the ending
highlighting sequence respectively the ending marking character that is used
for highlighting a holiday if a fixed date is on a legal holiday date.
This attains, that a possibly active highlighting according to today's date
or a holiday is turned off respectively an ending marking character is produced.
@code{%0} is used together with the @code{%9} special text.  The @code{%0} text
has no affect if no preceding @code{%9} text was found on the line.
@end table

@node Shell Command, , Replacements, Special Texts
@appendixsec Shell command @code{%!@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text
@cindex @code{%!@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text, shell command
@cindex Special text @code{%!@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}}, shell command
@cindex Shell command @code{%!@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text

@cindex Error code of executed commands
@cindex Executed commands, error code
@cindex Exit code of executed commands
@cindex Executed commands, exit code
@cindex Shell command, execution
@cindex Command line interpreter
The @var{argument} which trails @code{%!} until the end of the line, is
passed to the shell as a command for further processing.  But before, all
text variable references and @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} special texts for
replacing particular texts which are given in @var{argument} are
interpreted by Gcal.
@xref{Text variables},
and
@ref{Replacements, , @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} special texts for text replacement}@.
All leading text before the @code{%!} special text is processed
by Gcal as usual.  If the simple @option{--debug} respectively
@w{@option{--debug=internal}} option is given at program start-up,
informational messages about the executed command and its @emph{exit code}
will be shown on the @emph{standard error channel}
(@pxref{x-debug-internal, , Global option @option{--debug=internal}})@.

@cindex Error code 2
@cindex Exit code 2
If the @w{@option{--debug=abort}} option is given, the Gcal program will be
aborted with an error code in case an @emph{exit code} not equal zero has
occurred during the execution of the command.
@xref{x-2-Error-code, , Error Code 2},
and
@ref{x-debug-abort, , Global option @option{--debug=abort}},
for further information.

@cindex Execute command
@cindex Command execution
Use the @option{--execute-command} option if you want to execute all
@code{%!@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special texts by the shell instead of
seeing them textually only.
@xref{x-execute-command, , Fixed date option @option{--execute-command}},
for more details.

@node Special Texts Summary, Obsolete Special Texts, Special Texts, Top
@appendix Summary of all @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} Special Texts
@tbindex Special texts
@cindex @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} special texts, short-list
@cindex @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} special texts, summary
@cindex Summary of all @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} special texts
@cindex Short-list of all @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} special texts

Here is a short-list of all @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} special texts which can be
used in the text part of Gcal resource file line.  Of course, not all
possibilities concerning the representation ---which are offered by the
format instruction--- are listed here for those special texts which expanded
representation may be modified by an optional @var{format}, but only some few
exemplary.
@xref{Format Instruction},
for further details.
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@table @asis
@item @code{%i@r{[}@var{date}@r{][}#@r{[}@var{date}@r{]]}}
@cindex Inclusive date period @code{%i@r{[}@var{date}@r{][}#@r{[}@var{date}@r{]]}} special text
Exclusion of all non-inclusive date periods

@item @code{%e@r{[}@var{date}@r{][}#@r{[}@var{date}@r{]]}}
@cindex Exclusive date period @code{%e@r{[}@var{date}@r{][}#@r{[}@var{date}@r{]]}} special text
Exclusion of all exclusive date periods

@item @code{%@var{?}} Inclusive day period
@cindex Inclusive day period @code{%@var{?}} special texts

@table @code
@item %v
@cindex Inclusive legal holidays @code{%v} special text
Exclusion of all non-legal holidays

@item %x
@cindex Inclusive all holidays @code{%x} special text
Exclusion of all non-holidays

@item %a
@cindex Inclusive Monday @code{%a} special text
Exclusion of all non-Mondays

@item %c
@cindex Inclusive Tuesday @code{%c} special text
Exclusion of all non-Tuesdays

@item %f
@cindex Inclusive Wednesday @code{%f} special text
Exclusion of all non-Wednesdays

@item %g
@cindex Inclusive Thursday @code{%g} special text
Exclusion of all non-Thursdays

@item %h
@cindex Inclusive Friday @code{%h} special text
Exclusion of all non-Fridays

@item %l
@cindex Inclusive Saturday @code{%l} special text
Exclusion of all non-Saturdays

@item %p
@cindex Inclusive Sunday @code{%p} special text
Exclusion of all non-Sundays

@item %q
@cindex Inclusive Monday@dots{}Thursday @code{%q} special text
Exclusion of all non-Mondays@dots{}Thursdays

@item %r
@cindex Inclusive Monday@dots{}Friday @code{%r} special text
Exclusion of all non-Mondays@dots{}Fridays
@end table

@item @code{%@var{?}} Exclusive day period
@cindex Exclusive day period @code{%@var{?}} special texts

@table @code
@item %V
@cindex Exclusive legal holidays @code{%V} special text
Exclusion of all legal holidays

@item %X
@cindex Exclusive all holidays @code{%X} special text
Exclusion of all holidays

@item %A
@cindex Exclusive Monday @code{%A} special text
Exclusion of all Mondays

@item %C
@cindex Exclusive Tuesday @code{%C} special text
Exclusion of all Tuesdays

@item %F
@cindex Exclusive Wednesday @code{%F} special text
Exclusion of all Wednesdays

@item %G
@cindex Exclusive Thursday @code{%G} special text
Exclusion of all Thursdays

@item %H
@cindex Exclusive Friday @code{%H} special text
Exclusion of all Fridays

@item %L
@cindex Exclusive Saturday @code{%L} special text
Exclusion of all Saturdays

@item %P
@cindex Exclusive Sunday @code{%P} special text
Exclusion of all Sundays

@item %Q
@cindex Exclusive Monday@dots{}Thursday @code{%Q} special text
Exclusion of all Mondays@dots{}Thursdays

@item %R
@cindex Exclusive Monday@dots{}Friday @code{%R} special text
Exclusion of all Mondays@dots{}Fridays
@end table

@page
@item @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}K@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} weekday name
@cindex Weekday name @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}K@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text

@table @code
@item %K@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Complete weekday name @code{%K@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Complete weekday name

@item %>3#K@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex 3-letter weekday name @code{%>3#K@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
3-Letter weekday name

@item %>2#K@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex 2-letter weekday name @code{%>2#K@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
2-Letter weekday name
@end table

@item @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} weekday number
@cindex Weekday number @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special texts

@table @code
@item %W@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Weekday number @code{%W@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Weekday number, Mon@equiv{}1@dots{}Sun@equiv{}7

@item %>1&*W@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Weekday number @code{%>1&*W@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Weekday number, Mon@equiv{}1@dots{}Sun@equiv{}7, Ordinal Number suffix

@item %E@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Weekday number @code{%E@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Weekday number, Mon@equiv{}0@dots{}Sun@equiv{}6

@item %>1&*E@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Weekday number @code{%>1&*E@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Weekday number, Mon@equiv{}0@dots{}Sun@equiv{}6, Ordinal Number suffix

@item %I@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Weekday number @code{%I@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Weekday number, Sun@equiv{}1@dots{}Sat@equiv{}7

@item %>1&*I@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Weekday number @code{%>1&*I@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Weekday number, Sun@equiv{}1@dots{}Sat@equiv{}7, Ordinal Number suffix

@item %J@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Weekday number @code{%J@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Weekday number, Sun@equiv{}0@dots{}Sat@equiv{}6

@item %>1&*J@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Weekday number @code{%>1&*J@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Weekday number, Sun@equiv{}0@dots{}Sat@equiv{}6, Ordinal Number suffix

@item %S@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Weekday number @code{%S@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Weekday number, @var{starting day of week}@equiv{}1

@item %>1&*S@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Weekday number @code{%>1&*S@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Weekday number, @var{starting day of week}@equiv{}1, Ordinal Number suffix

@item %T@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Weekday number @code{%T@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Weekday number, @var{starting day of week}@equiv{}0

@item %>1&*T@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Weekday number @code{%>1&*T@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Weekday number, @var{starting day of week}@equiv{}0, Ordinal Number suffix
@end table

@item @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}N@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} day number
@cindex Day number @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}N@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text

@table @code
@item %N@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Day-of-year number @code{%N@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Day-of-year number

@item %>03*N@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Day-of-year number @code{%>03*N@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Day-of-year number, 3-digits with leading zeroes

@item %>1&*N@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Day-of-year number @code{%>1&*N@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Day-of-year number, Ordinal Number suffix

@item %>03&*N@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Day-of-year number @code{%>03&*N@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Day-of-year number, 3-digits with leading zeroes, Ordinal Number suffix
@end table

@item @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}D@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} day number
@cindex Day number @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}D@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text

@table @code
@item %D@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Day number @code{%D@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Day number

@item %>02*D@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Day number @code{%>02*D@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Day number, 2-digits with leading zero

@item %>1&*D@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Day number @code{%>1&*D@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Day number, Ordinal Number suffix

@item %>02&*D@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Day number @code{%>02&*D@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Day number, 2-digits with leading zero, Ordinal Number suffix
@end table

@item @code{%k@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}}
@cindex Week number @code{%@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
@acronym{ISO} week number or standard week number,
either 2-digits with leading zero, or 4-alphanumeric characters text

@item @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}U@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} month name
@cindex Month name @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}U@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text

@table @code
@item %U@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Complete month name @code{%U@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Complete month name

@item %>3#U@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex 3-letter month name @code{%>3#U@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
3-Letter month name
@end table

@item @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}M@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} month
@cindex Month @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}M@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text

@table @code
@item %M@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Month number @code{%M@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Month number

@item %>02*M@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Month number @code{%>02*M@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Month number, 2-digits with leading zero

@item %>1&*M@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Month number @code{%>1&*M@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Month number, Ordinal Number suffix

@item %>02&*M@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Month number @code{%>02&*M@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Month number, 2-digits with leading zero, Ordinal Number suffix
@end table

@item @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}Y@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} year number
@cindex Year number @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}Y@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text

@table @code
@item %Y@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Year number @code{%Y@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Year number

@item %>04*Y@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Year number @code{%>04*Y@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Complete year number, 4-digits with leading zeroes
@end table

@item @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} Moon phase
@cindex Moon phase @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special texts

@table @code
@item %O@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Moon phase text @code{%O@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Moon phase text

@item %>03*O@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Moon phase text @code{%>03*O@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Moon phase text, 3-digits with leading zeroes

@item %Z@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Moon phase text graphics @code{%Z@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Moon phase text graphics
@end table

@item @code{%@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} biorhythm
@cindex Biorhythm @code{%@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special texts

@table @code
@item %,@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Biorhythm text @code{%,@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Biorhythm text (series of values)

@item %;@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Biorhythm text graphics @code{%;@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Biorhythm text graphics (bar)
@end table

@item @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} difference value
@cindex Difference value @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special texts

@table @code
@item %y@var{date}
@cindex Relative year number @code{%y@var{date}} special text
Relative year number

@item %b@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Age value (birthday) @code{%b@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Age value (birthday)

@item %B@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}
@cindex Age value @code{%B@r{[}@var{date}@r{]}} special text
Age value (birthday), Ordinal Number suffix
@end table

@item @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} actual clocktime
@cindex Actual clocktime @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special texts

@table @code
@item %t@r{[}*@r{][[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Actual local time in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} format @code{%t@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text
Actual local time in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} format

@item %@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}'@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Actual local time in @w{@var{m}@r{[}@var{m}@r{@dots{}]}} format @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}'@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text
Actual local time in @w{@var{m}@r{[}@var{m}@r{@dots{}]}} format

@item %@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}_@r{[}*@r{][[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Actual local time hour @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}_@r{[}*@r{][[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}} special text
Actual local time hour in @w{@var{h}@r{[}@var{h}@r{@dots{}]}} format

@item %@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}?@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Actual local time minute @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}?@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}} special text
Actual local time minute in @w{@var{m}@r{[}@var{m}@r{@dots{}]}} format

@item %@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@{@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Actual local time 12-hour format suffix @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@{@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}} special text
Actual local time 12-hour format suffix

@item %@@@r{[}*@r{][[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Actual Universal time in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}/@var{date}}} format @code{%@@@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text
Actual Universal time in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}/@var{date}}} format

@item %@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}`@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Actual Universal time in @w{@code{@var{m}@r{[}@var{m}@r{@dots{}]}/@var{date}}} format @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}`@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text
Actual Universal time in @w{@code{@var{m}@r{[}@var{m}@r{@dots{}]}/@var{date}}} format

@item %@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}.@r{[}*@r{][[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Actual Universal time hour @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}.@r{[}*@r{][[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}} special text
Actual Universal time hour in @w{@var{h}@r{[}@var{h}@r{@dots{}]}} format

@item %@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}/@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Actual Universal time minute @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}/@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}} special text
Actual Universal time minute in @w{@var{m}@r{[}@var{m}@r{@dots{}]}} format

@item %@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Actual Universal time 12-hour format suffix @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}} special text
Actual Universal time 12-hour format suffix

@item %"@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Numerical Universal time timezone offset value @code{%"@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text
Numerical Universal time timezone offset value

@item %=@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Numerical local time timezone offset value @code{%=@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text
Actual numerical local time timezone offset value
@end table

@item @code{%n@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{]}}
@cindex Textual date @code{%n@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text
Textual date in fixed @w{@samp{%>02*D@r{-}%>3#U@r{-}%>04*Y}} format

@item @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}j@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{]}}
@cindex Julian day number @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}j@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text
Julian day number

@item @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}b@r{[}*@r{][}@var{mode}@r{]}@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate-1}/@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate-2}} geographical distance and course angle
@cindex Geographical distance and course angle @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}b@var{argument}} special texts

@table @code
@item %b0@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate-1}/@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate-2}
@cindex Geographical distance @w{@code{%b0@var{argument}}} special text
Geographical distance (air line distance) in kilometers

@item %b*0@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate-1}/@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate-2}
@cindex Geographical distance @w{@code{%b*0@var{argument}}} special text
Geographical distance (air line distance) in statute miles

@item %b1@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate-1}/@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-coordinate-2}
@cindex Course angle (true track) @w{@code{%b1@var{argument}}} special text
Course angle (true track) between
@w{@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate-1}} and
@w{@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate-2}}
in degrees and arcminutes

@item %b*1@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate-1}/@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate-2}
@cindex Course angle (true track) @w{@code{%b*1@var{argument}}} special text
Course angle (true track) between
@w{@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate-1}} and
@w{@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate-2}}
in decimal degrees

@item %b2@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate-1}/@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate-2}
@cindex Course angle (true track) @w{@code{%b2@var{argument}}} special text
Course angle (true track) between
@w{@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate-2}} and
@w{@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate-1}}
in degrees and arcminutes

@item %b*2@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate-1}/@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate-2}
@cindex Course angle (true track) @w{@code{%b*2@var{argument}}} special text
Course angle (true track) between
@w{@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate-2}} and
@w{@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate-1}}
in decimal degrees
@end table

@item @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}*@r{][}@var{mode}@r{]}@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}} Sun data
@cindex Sun data @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@var{argument}} special texts

@table @code
@item %o0@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s0@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, astronomical midnight time @code{%o0@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, astronomical midnight time @code{%s0@var{argument}} special text
Sun's astronomical midnight time
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %o*0@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*0@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, astronomical midnight time @code{%o*0@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, astronomical midnight time @code{%s*0@var{argument}} special text
Sun's astronomical midnight time
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %o1@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s1@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, astronomical noon time @code{%o1@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, astronomical noon time @code{%s1@var{argument}} special text
Sun's astronomical noon time
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %o*1@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*1@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, astronomical noon time @code{%o*1@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, astronomical noon time @code{%s*1@var{argument}} special text
Sun's astronomical noon time
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %o2@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, geometrical rise time @code{%o2@var{argument}} special text
Geometrical rise time of Sun's center
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %o*2@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, geometrical rise time @code{%o*2@var{argument}} special text
Geometrical rise time of Sun's center
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %s2@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, geometrical set time @code{%s2@var{argument}} special text
Geometrical set time of Sun's center
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %o*2@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, geometrical set time @code{%s*2@var{argument}} special text
Geometrical set time of Sun's center
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %u2@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, geometrical visibility @code{%u2@var{argument}} special text
Period of geometrical visibility,
Sun's center above reference altitude,
in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %u*2@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, geometrical visibility @code{%u*2@var{argument}} special text
Period of geometrical visibility,
Sun's center above reference altitude,
in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %z2@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, geometrical non-visibility @code{%z2@var{argument}} special text
Period of geometrical non-visibility,
Sun's center below reference altitude,
in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %z*2@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, geometrical non-visibility @code{%z*2@var{argument}} special text
Period of geometrical non-visibility,
Sun's center below reference altitude,
in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %o3@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's upper limb, geometrical rise time @code{%o3@var{argument}} special text
Geometrical rise time of Sun's upper limb
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %o*3@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's upper limb, geometrical rise time @code{%o*3@var{argument}} special text
Geometrical rise time of Sun's upper limb
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %s3@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's upper limb, geometrical set time @code{%s3@var{argument}} special text
Geometrical set time of Sun's upper limb
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %s*3@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's upper limb, geometrical set time @code{%s*3@var{argument}} special text
Geometrical set time of Sun's upper limb
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %u3@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's upper limb, geometrical visibility @code{%u3@var{argument}} special text
Period of geometrical visibility,
Sun's upper limb above reference altitude,
in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %u*3@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's upper limb, geometrical visibility @code{%u*3@var{argument}} special text
Period of geometrical visibility,
Sun's upper limb above reference altitude,
in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %z3@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's upper limb, geometrical non-visibility @code{%z3@var{argument}} special text
Period of geometrical non-visibility,
Sun's upper limb below reference altitude,
in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %z*3@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's upper limb, geometrical non-visibility @code{%z*3@var{argument}} special text
Period of geometrical non-visibility,
Sun's upper limb below reference altitude,
in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %o4@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, rise time @code{%o4@var{argument}} special text
Rise time of Sun's center
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %o*4@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, rise time @code{%o*4@var{argument}} special text
Rise time of Sun's center
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %s4@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, set time @code{%s4@var{argument}} special text
Set time of Sun's center
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %s*4@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, set time @code{%s*4@var{argument}} special text
Set time of Sun's center
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %u4@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, visibility @code{%u4@var{argument}} special text
Period of visibility,
Sun's center above reference altitude,
in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %u*4@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, visibility @code{%u*4@var{argument}} special text
Period of visibility,
Sun's center above reference altitude,
in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %z4@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, non-visibility @code{%z4@var{argument}} special text
Period of non-visibility,
Sun's center below reference altitude,
in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %z*4@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, non-visibility @code{%z*4@var{argument}} special text
Period of non-visibility,
Sun's center below reference altitude,
in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %o5@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's upper limb, standard rise time @code{%o5@var{argument}} special text
Standard rise time of Sun's upper limb
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %o*5@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's upper limb, standard rise time @code{%o*5@var{argument}} special text
Standard rise time of Sun's upper limb
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %s5@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's upper limb, standard set time @code{%s5@var{argument}} special text
Standard set time of Sun's upper limb
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %s*5@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's upper limb, standard set time @code{%s*5@var{argument}} special text
Standard set time of Sun's upper limb
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %u5@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's upper limb, standard visibility @code{%u5@var{argument}} special text
Period of standard visibility,
Sun's upper limb above reference altitude,
in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %u*5@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's upper limb, standard visibility @code{%u*5@var{argument}} special text
Period of standard visibility,
Sun's upper limb above reference altitude,
in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %z5@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's upper limb, standard non-visibility @code{%z5@var{argument}} special text
Period of standard non-visibility,
Sun's upper limb below reference altitude,
in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %z*5@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's upper limb, standard non-visibility @code{%z*5@var{argument}} special text
Period of standard non-visibility,
Sun's upper limb below reference altitude,
in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %o6@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, begin of civil twilight @code{%o6@var{argument}} special text
Begin time of civil twilight in the morning
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %o*6@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, begin of civil twilight @code{%o*6@var{argument}} special text
Begin time of civil twilight in the morning
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %s6@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, end of civil twilight @code{%s6@var{argument}} special text
End time of civil twilight in the evening
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %s*6@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, end of civil twilight @code{%s*6@var{argument}} special text
End time of civil twilight in the evening
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %u6@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, period above civil twilight reference altitude @code{%u6@var{argument}} special text
Period of Sun's center above reference altitude
of civil twilight
in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %u*6@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, period above civil twilight reference altitude @code{%u*6@var{argument}} special text
Period of Sun's center above reference altitude
of civil twilight
in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %z6@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, period below civil twilight reference altitude @code{%z6@var{argument}} special text
Period of Sun's center below reference altitude
of civil twilight
in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %z*6@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, period below civil twilight reference altitude @code{%z*6@var{argument}} special text
Period of Sun's center below reference altitude
of civil twilight
in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %o7@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, begin of nautical twilight @code{%o7@var{argument}} special text
Begin time of nautical twilight in the morning
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %o*7@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, begin of nautical twilight @code{%o*7@var{argument}} special text
Begin time of nautical twilight in the morning
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %s7@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, end of nautical twilight @code{%s7@var{argument}} special text
End time of nautical twilight in the evening
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %s*7@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, end of nautical twilight @code{%s*7@var{argument}} special text
End time of nautical twilight in the evening
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %u7@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, period above nautical twilight reference altitude @code{%u7@var{argument}} special text
Period of Sun's center above reference altitude
of nautical twilight
in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %u*7@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, period above nautical twilight reference altitude @code{%u*7@var{argument}} special text
Period of Sun's center above reference altitude
of nautical twilight
in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %z7@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, period below nautical twilight reference altitude @code{%z7@var{argument}} special text
Period of Sun's center below reference altitude
of nautical twilight
in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %z*7@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, period below nautical twilight reference altitude @code{%z*7@var{argument}} special text
Period of Sun's center below reference altitude
of nautical twilight
in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %o8@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, begin of amateur-astronomical @code{%o8@var{argument}} special text
Begin time of amateur-astronomical twilight in the morning
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %o*8@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, begin of amateur-astronomical @code{%o*8@var{argument}} special text
Begin time of amateur-astronomical twilight in the morning
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %s8@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, end of amateur-astronomical @code{%s8@var{argument}} special text
End time of amateur-astronomical twilight in the evening
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %s*8@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, end of amateur-astronomical @code{%s*8@var{argument}} special text
End time of amateur-astronomical twilight in the evening
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %u8@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, period above amateur-astronomical twilight reference altitude @code{%u8@var{argument}} special text
Period of Sun's center above reference altitude
of amateur-astronomical twilight
in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %u*8@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, period above amateur-astronomical twilight reference altitude @code{%u*8@var{argument}} special text
Period of Sun's center above reference altitude
of amateur-astronomical twilight
in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %z8@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, period below amateur-astronomical twilight reference altitude @code{%z8@var{argument}} special text
Period of Sun's center below reference altitude
of amateur-astronomical twilight
in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %z*8@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, period below amateur-astronomical twilight reference altitude @code{%z*8@var{argument}} special text
Period of Sun's center below reference altitude
of amateur-astronomical twilight
in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %o9@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, begin of astronomical twilight @code{%o9@var{argument}} special text
Begin time of astronomical twilight in the morning
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %o*9@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, begin of astronomical twilight @code{%o*9@var{argument}} special text
Begin time of astronomical twilight in the morning
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %s9@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, end of astronomical twilight @code{%s9@var{argument}} special text
End time of astronomical twilight in the evening
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %s*9@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, end of astronomical twilight @code{%s*9@var{argument}} special text
End time of astronomical twilight in the evening
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %u9@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, period above astronomical twilight reference altitude @code{%u9@var{argument}} special text
Period of Sun's center above reference altitude
of astronomical twilight
in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %u*9@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, period above astronomical twilight reference altitude @code{%u*9@var{argument}} special text
Period of Sun's center above reference altitude
of astronomical twilight
in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %z9@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, period below astronomical twilight reference altitude @code{%z9@var{argument}} special text
Period of Sun's center below reference altitude
of astronomical twilight
in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %z*9@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun's center, period below astronomical twilight reference altitude @code{%z*9@var{argument}} special text
Period of Sun's center below reference altitude
of astronomical twilight
in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %oa@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %sa@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, topocentric elevation @code{%oa@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric elevation @code{%sa@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric elevation of Sun in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*a@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*a@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, topocentric elevation @code{%o*a@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric elevation @code{%s*a@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric elevation of Sun in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %ob@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %sb@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, topocentric azimuth @code{%ob@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric azimuth @code{%sb@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric azimuth of Sun in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*b@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*b@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, topocentric azimuth @code{%s*b@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric azimuth @code{%o*b@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric azimuth of Sun in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %oc@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %sc@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, topocentric declination @code{%oc@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric declination @code{%sc@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric declination of Sun in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*c@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*c@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, topocentric declination @code{%o*c@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric declination @code{%s*c@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric declination of Sun in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %od@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %sd@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, topocentric ecliptic longitude @code{%od@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric ecliptic longitude @code{%sd@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric ecliptic longitude of Sun in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*d@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*d@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, topocentric ecliptic longitude @code{%o*d@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric ecliptic longitude @code{%s*d@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric ecliptic longitude of Sun in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %oe@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %se@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, topocentric right ascension @code{%oe@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric right ascension @code{%se@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric right ascension of Sun
as time value in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*e@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*e@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, topocentric right ascension @code{%o*e@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric right ascension @code{%s*e@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric right ascension of Sun
as time value in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %of@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %sf@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, topocentric distance @code{%of@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric distance @code{%sf@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric distance of Sun in astronomical units
in @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %o*f@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*f@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, topocentric distance @code{%o*f@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric distance @code{%s*f@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric distance of Sun in kilometers
in @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %og@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %sg@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, topocentric horizontal parallax @code{%og@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric horizontal parallax @code{%sg@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric horizontal parallax of Sun in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*g@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*g@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, topocentric horizontal parallax @code{%o*g@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric horizontal parallax @code{%s*g@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric horizontal parallax of Sun in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %oh@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %sh@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, topocentric semidiameter @code{%oh@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric semidiameter @code{%sh@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric semidiameter of Sun in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*h@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*h@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, topocentric semidiameter @code{%o*h@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric semidiameter @code{%s*h@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric semidiameter of Sun in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %oi@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %si@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, refraction @code{%oi@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, refraction @code{%si@var{argument}} special text
Atmospheric refraction in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*i@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*i@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, refraction @code{%o*i@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, refraction @code{%s*i@var{argument}} special text
Atmospheric refraction in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %oj@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %sj@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, geocentric elevation @code{%oj@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric elevation @code{%sj@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric elevation of Sun in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*j@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*j@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, geocentric elevation @code{%o*j@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric elevation @code{%s*j@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric elevation of Sun in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %ok@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %sk@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, geocentric azimuth @code{%ok@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric azimuth @code{%sk@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric azimuth of Sun in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*k@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*k@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, geocentric azimuth @code{%s*k@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric azimuth @code{%o*k@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric azimuth of Sun in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %ol@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %sl@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, geocentric declination @code{%ol@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric declination @code{%sl@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric declination of Sun in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*l@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*l@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, geocentric declination @code{%o*l@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric declination @code{%s*l@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric declination of Sun in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %om@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %sm@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, geocentric ecliptic longitude @code{%om@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric ecliptic longitude @code{%sm@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric ecliptic longitude of Sun in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*m@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*m@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, geocentric ecliptic longitude @code{%o*m@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric ecliptic longitude @code{%s*m@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric ecliptic longitude of Sun in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %on@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %sn@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, geocentric right ascension @code{%on@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric right ascension @code{%sn@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric right ascension of Sun
as time value in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*n@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*n@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, geocentric right ascension @code{%o*n@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric right ascension @code{%s*n@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric right ascension of Sun
as time value in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %oo@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %so@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, geocentric distance @code{%oo@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric distance @code{%so@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric distance of Sun in astronomical units
in @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %o*o@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*o@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, geocentric distance @code{%o*o@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric distance @code{%s*o@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric distance of Sun in kilometers
in @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %op@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %sp@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, geocentric horizontal parallax @code{%op@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric horizontal parallax @code{%sp@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric horizontal parallax of Sun in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*p@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*p@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, geocentric horizontal parallax @code{%o*p@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric horizontal parallax @code{%s*p@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric horizontal parallax of Sun in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %oq@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %sq@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, geocentric semidiameter @code{%oq@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric semidiameter @code{%sq@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric semidiameter of Sun in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*q@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*q@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, geocentric semidiameter @code{%o*q@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric semidiameter @code{%s*q@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric semidiameter of Sun in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %or@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %sr@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %o*r@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*r@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, delta-t @code{%or@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, delta-t @code{%sr@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, delta-t @code{%s*r@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, delta-t @code{%o*r@var{argument}} special text
Delta-t in seconds
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %os@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %ss@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, local sidereal time @code{%os@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, local sidereal time @code{%ss@var{argument}} special text
Local sidereal time
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %o*s@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*s@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, local sidereal time @code{%o*s@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, local sidereal time @code{%s*s@var{argument}} special text
Local sidereal time
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %ot@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %st@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, base time @code{%ot@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, base time @code{%st@var{argument}} special text
Base time as time value in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*t@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*t@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, base time @code{%o*t@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, base time @code{%s*t@var{argument}} special text
Base time as time value in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %ou@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %su@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %o*u@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*u@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, Julian date @code{%ou@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, Julian date @code{%su@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, Julian date @code{%o*u@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, Julian date @code{%s*u@var{argument}} special text
Julian date in days
in @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %ov@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %sv@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %o*v@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*v@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, Julian Ephemeris date @code{%ov@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, Julian Ephemeris date @code{%sv@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, Julian Ephemeris date @code{%o*v@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, Julian Ephemeris date @code{%s*v@var{argument}} special text
Julian Ephemeris date in days
in @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %ow@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %sw@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, equation of time @code{%ow@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, equation of time @code{%sw@var{argument}} special text
Equation of time as time value in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*w@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*w@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, equation of time @code{%o*w@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, equation of time @code{%s*w@var{argument}} special text
Equation of time as time value in decimal hours
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %ox@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %sx@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta topocentric elevation @code{%ox@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta topocentric elevation @code{%sx@var{argument}} special text
Delta topocentric elevation of Sun/Moon
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*x@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*x@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta topocentric elevation @code{%o*x@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta topocentric elevation @code{%s*x@var{argument}} special text
Delta topocentric elevation of Sun/Moon
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %oy@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %sy@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta topocentric azimuth @code{%oy@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta topocentric azimuth @code{%sy@var{argument}} special text
Delta topocentric azimuth of Sun/Moon
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*y@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*y@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta topocentric azimuth @code{%o*y@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta topocentric azimuth @code{%s*y@var{argument}} special text
Delta topocentric azimuth of Sun/Moon
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %oz@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %sz@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta geocentric elevation @code{%oz@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta geocentric elevation @code{%sz@var{argument}} special text
Delta geocentric elevation of Sun/Moon
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*z@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*z@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta geocentric elevation @code{%o*z@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta geocentric elevation @code{%s*z@var{argument}} special text
Delta geocentric elevation of Sun/Moon
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %oA@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %sA@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta geocentric azimuth @code{%oA@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta geocentric azimuth @code{%sA@var{argument}} special text
Delta geocentric azimuth of Sun/Moon
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*A@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*A@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta geocentric azimuth @code{%o*A@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta geocentric azimuth @code{%s*A@var{argument}} special text
Delta geocentric azimuth of Sun/Moon
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %oB@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta topocentric elevation at standard sunrise time @code{%oB@var{argument}} special text
Delta topocentric elevation of Sun/Moon
at standard sunrise time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*B@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta topocentric elevation at standard sunrise time @code{%o*B@var{argument}} special text
Delta topocentric elevation of Sun/Moon
at standard sunrise time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %sB@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta topocentric elevation at standard sunset time @code{%sB@var{argument}} special text
Delta topocentric elevation of Sun/Moon
at standard sunset time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %s*B@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta topocentric elevation at standard sunset time @code{%s*B@var{argument}} special text
Delta topocentric elevation of Sun/Moon
at standard sunset time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %oC@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta topocentric azimuth at standard sunrise time @code{%oC@var{argument}} special text
Delta topocentric azimuth of Sun/Moon
at standard sunrise time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*C@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta topocentric azimuth at standard sunrise time @code{%o*C@var{argument}} special text
Delta topocentric azimuth of Sun/Moon
at standard sunrise time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %sC@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta topocentric azimuth at standard sunset time @code{%sC@var{argument}} special text
Delta topocentric azimuth of Sun/Moon
at standard sunset time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %s*C@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta topocentric azimuth at standard sunset time @code{%s*C@var{argument}} special text
Delta topocentric azimuth of Sun/Moon
at standard sunset time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %oD@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta geocentric elevation at standard sunrise time @code{%oD@var{argument}} special text
Delta geocentric elevation of Sun/Moon
at standard sunrise time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*D@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta geocentric elevation at standard sunrise time @code{%o*D@var{argument}} special text
Delta geocentric elevation of Sun/Moon
at standard sunrise time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %sD@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta geocentric elevation at standard sunset time @code{%sD@var{argument}} special text
Delta geocentric elevation of Sun/Moon
at standard sunset time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %s*D@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta geocentric elevation at standard sunset time @code{%s*D@var{argument}} special text
Delta geocentric elevation of Sun/Moon
at standard sunset time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %oE@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta geocentric azimuth at standard sunrise time @code{%oE@var{argument}} special text
Delta geocentric azimuth of Sun/Moon
at standard sunrise time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*E@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta geocentric azimuth at standard sunrise time @code{%o*E@var{argument}} special text
Delta geocentric azimuth of Sun/Moon
at standard sunrise time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %sE@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta geocentric azimuth at standard sunset time @code{%sE@var{argument}} special text
Delta geocentric azimuth of Sun/Moon
at standard sunset time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %s*E@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta geocentric azimuth at standard sunset time @code{%s*E@var{argument}} special text
Delta geocentric azimuth of Sun/Moon
at standard sunset time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %oF@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %sF@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta astronomical midnight time @code{%oF@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta astronomical midnight time @code{%sF@var{argument}} special text
Delta astronomical midnight time of Sun/Moon
as time value in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*F@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*F@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta astronomical midnight time @code{%o*F@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta astronomical midnight time @code{%s*F@var{argument}} special text
Delta astronomical midnight time of Sun/Moon
as time value in decimal hours
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %oG@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %sG@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta astronomical noon time @code{%oG@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta astronomical noon time @code{%sG@var{argument}} special text
Delta astronomical noon of Sun/Moon
as time value in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*G@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*G@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta astronomical noon time @code{%o*G@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta astronomical noon time @code{%s*G@var{argument}} special text
Delta astronomical noon of Sun/Moon
as time value in decimal hours
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %oH@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta standard rise time @code{%oH@var{argument}} special text
Delta time of standard rise of Sun/Moon
at standard sunrise time
as time value in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*H@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta standard rise time @code{%o*H@var{argument}} special text
Delta time of standard rise of Sun/Moon
at standard sunrise time
as time value in decimal hours
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %sH@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta standard set time @code{%sH@var{argument}} special text
Delta time of standard set of Sun/Moon
at standard sunset time
as time value in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %s*H@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun/Moon, delta standard set time @code{%s*H@var{argument}} special text
Delta time of standard set of Sun/Moon
at standard sunset time
as time value in decimal hours
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %oI@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %sI@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, topocentric elevation at Sun's astronomical midnight time @code{%oI@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric elevation at Sun's astronomical midnight time @code{%sI@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric elevation of Sun
at Sun's astronomical midnight time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*I@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*I@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, topocentric elevation at Sun's astronomical midnight time @code{%o*I@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric elevation at Sun's astronomical midnight time @code{%s*I@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric elevation of Sun
at Sun's astronomical midnight time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %oJ@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %sJ@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, topocentric elevation at Sun's astronomical noon time @code{%oJ@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric elevation at Sun's astronomical noon time @code{%sJ@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric elevation of Sun
at Sun's astronomical noon time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*J@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*J@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, topocentric elevation at Sun's astronomical noon time @code{%o*J@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, topocentric elevation at Sun's astronomical noon time @code{%s*J@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric elevation of Sun
at Sun's astronomical noon time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %oK@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, topocentric elevation at standard rise time @code{%oK@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric elevation of Sun
at standard sunrise time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*K@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, topocentric elevation at standard rise time @code{%o*K@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric elevation of Sun
at standard sunrise time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %sK@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, topocentric elevation at standard set time @code{%sK@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric elevation of Sun
at standard sunset time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %s*K@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, topocentric elevation at standard set time @code{%s*K@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric elevation of Sun
at standard sunset time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %oL@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, topocentric azimuth at standard rise time @code{%oL@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric azimuth of Sun
at standard sunrise time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*L@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, topocentric azimuth at standard rise time @code{%o*L@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric azimuth of Sun
at standard sunrise time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %sL@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, topocentric azimuth at standard set time @code{%sL@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric azimuth of Sun
at standard sunset time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %s*L@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, topocentric azimuth at standard set time @code{%s*L@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric azimuth of Sun
at standard sunset time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %oM@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %sM@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, geocentric elevation at Sun's astronomical midnight time @code{%oM@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric elevation at Sun's astronomical midnight time @code{%sM@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric elevation of Sun
at Sun's astronomical midnight time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*M@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*M@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, geocentric elevation at Sun's astronomical midnight time @code{%o*M@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric elevation at Sun's astronomical midnight time @code{%s*M@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric elevation of Sun
at Sun's astronomical midnight time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %oN@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %sN@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, geocentric elevation at Sun's astronomical noon time @code{%oN@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric elevation at Sun's astronomical noon time @code{%sN@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric elevation of Sun
at Sun's astronomical noon time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*N@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %s*N@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, geocentric elevation at Sun's astronomical noon time @code{%o*N@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Sun, geocentric elevation at Sun's astronomical noon time @code{%s*N@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric elevation of Sun
at Sun's astronomical noon time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %oO@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, geocentric elevation at standard rise time @code{%oO@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric elevation of Sun
at standard sunrise time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*O@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, geocentric elevation at standard rise time @code{%o*O@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric elevation of Sun
at standard sunrise time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %sO@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, geocentric elevation at standard set time @code{%sO@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric elevation of Sun
at standard sunset time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %s*O@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, geocentric elevation at standard set time @code{%s*O@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric elevation of Sun
at standard sunset time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %oP@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, geocentric azimuth at standard rise time @code{%oP@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric azimuth of Sun
at standard sunrise time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %o*P@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, geocentric azimuth at standard rise time @code{%o*P@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric azimuth of Sun
at standard sunrise time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %sP@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, geocentric azimuth at standard set time @code{%sP@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric azimuth of Sun
at standard sunset time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %s*P@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, geocentric azimuth at standard set time @code{%s*P@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric azimuth of Sun
at standard sunset time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %oQ@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, single shadow length time at forenoon @code{%oQ@var{argument}} special text
Single shadow length time in the forenoon
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %o*Q@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, single shadow length time at forenoon @code{%o*Q@var{argument}} special text
Single shadow length time in the forenoon
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %sQ@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, single shadow length time at afternoon @code{%sQ@var{argument}} special text
Single shadow length time in the afternoon
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %s*Q@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, single shadow length time at afternoon @code{%s*Q@var{argument}} special text
Single shadow length time in the afternoon
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %uQ@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, period of single or shorter shadow length @code{%uQ@var{argument}} special text
Period of single or shorter shadow length
in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %u*Q@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, period of single or shorter shadow length @code{%u*Q@var{argument}} special text
Period of single or shorter shadow length
in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %zQ@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, period of longer than single shadow length @code{%zQ@var{argument}} special text
Period of longer than single shadow length
in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %z*Q@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, period of longer than single shadow length @code{%z*Q@var{argument}} special text
Period of longer than single shadow length
in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %oR@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, double shadow length time at forenoon @code{%oR@var{argument}} special text
Double shadow length time in the forenoon
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %o*R@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, double shadow length time at forenoon @code{%o*R@var{argument}} special text
Double shadow length time in the forenoon
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %sR@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, double shadow length time at afternoon @code{%sR@var{argument}} special text
Double shadow length time in the afternoon
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %s*R@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, double shadow length time at afternoon @code{%s*R@var{argument}} special text
Double shadow length time in the afternoon
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %uR@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, period of double or shorter shadow length @code{%uR@var{argument}} special text
Period of double or shorter shadow length
in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %u*R@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, period of double or shorter shadow length @code{%u*R@var{argument}} special text
Period of double or shorter shadow length
in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %zR@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, period of longer than double shadow length @code{%zR@var{argument}} special text
Period of longer than double shadow length
in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %z*R@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Sun, period of longer than double shadow length @code{%z*R@var{argument}} special text
Period of longer than double shadow length
in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format
@end table

@item @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@r{[}*@r{][}@var{mode}@r{]}@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}} Moon data
@cindex Moon data @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}@var{argument}} special texts

@table @code
@item %(0@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)0@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, astronomical midnight time @code{%(0@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, astronomical midnight time @code{%)0@var{argument}} special text
Moon's astronomical midnight time
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %(*0@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*0@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, astronomical midnight time @code{%(*0@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, astronomical midnight time @code{%)*0@var{argument}} special text
Moon's astronomical midnight time
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %(1@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)1@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, astronomical noon time @code{%(1@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, astronomical noon time @code{%)1@var{argument}} special text
Moon's astronomical noon time
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %(*1@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*1@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, astronomical noon time @code{%(*1@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, astronomical noon time @code{%)*1@var{argument}} special text
Moon's astronomical noon time
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %(2@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon's center, geometrical rise time @code{%(2@var{argument}} special text
Geometrical rise time of Moon's center
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %(*2@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon's center, geometrical rise time @code{%(*2@var{argument}} special text
Geometrical rise time of Moon's center
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %)2@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon's center, geometrical set time @code{%)2@var{argument}} special text
Geometrical set time of Moon's center
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %(*2@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon's center, geometrical set time @code{%)*2@var{argument}} special text
Geometrical set time of Moon's center
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %[2@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon's center, geometrical visibility @code{%[2@var{argument}} special text
Period of geometrical visibility,
Moon's center above reference altitude,
in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %[*2@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon's center, geometrical visibility @code{%[*2@var{argument}} special text
Period of geometrical visibility,
Moon's center above reference altitude,
in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %]2@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon's center, geometrical non-visibility @code{%]2@var{argument}} special text
Period of geometrical non-visibility,
Moon's center below reference altitude,
in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %]*2@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon's center, geometrical non-visibility @code{%]*2@var{argument}} special text
Period of geometrical non-visibility,
Moon's center below reference altitude,
in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %(3@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon's upper limb, geometrical rise time @code{%(3@var{argument}} special text
Geometrical rise time of Moon's upper limb
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %(*3@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon's upper limb, geometrical rise time @code{%(*3@var{argument}} special text
Geometrical rise time of Moon's upper limb
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %)3@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon's upper limb, geometrical set time @code{%)3@var{argument}} special text
Geometrical set time of Moon's upper limb
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %)*3@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon's upper limb, geometrical set time @code{%)*3@var{argument}} special text
Geometrical set time of Moon's upper limb
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %[3@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon's upper limb, geometrical visibility @code{%[3@var{argument}} special text
Period of geometrical visibility,
Moon's upper limb above reference altitude,
in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %[*3@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon's upper limb, geometrical visibility @code{%[*3@var{argument}} special text
Period of geometrical visibility,
Moon's upper limb above reference altitude,
in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %]3@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon's upper limb, geometrical non-visibility @code{%]3@var{argument}} special text
Period of geometrical non-visibility,
Moon's upper limb below reference altitude,
in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %]*3@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon's upper limb, geometrical non-visibility @code{%]*3@var{argument}} special text
Period of geometrical non-visibility,
Moon's upper limb below reference altitude,
in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %(4@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon's center, rise time @code{%(4@var{argument}} special text
Rise time of Moon's center
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %(*4@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon's center, rise time @code{%(*4@var{argument}} special text
Rise time of Moon's center
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %)4@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon's center, set time @code{%)4@var{argument}} special text
Set time of Moon's center
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %)*4@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon's center, set time @code{%)*4@var{argument}} special text
Set time of Moon's center
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %[4@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon's center, visibility @code{%[4@var{argument}} special text
Period of visibility,
Moon's center above reference altitude,
in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %[*4@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon's center, visibility @code{%[*4@var{argument}} special text
Period of visibility,
Moon's center above reference altitude,
in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %]4@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon's center, non-visibility @code{%]4@var{argument}} special text
Period of non-visibility,
Moon's center below reference altitude,
in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %]*4@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon's center, non-visibility @code{%]*4@var{argument}} special text
Period of non-visibility,
Moon's center below reference altitude,
in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %(5@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon's upper limb, standard rise time @code{%(5@var{argument}} special text
Standard rise time of Moon's upper limb
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %(*5@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon's upper limb, standard rise time @code{%(*5@var{argument}} special text
Standard rise time of Moon's upper limb
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %)5@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon's upper limb, standard set time @code{%)5@var{argument}} special text
Standard set time of Moon's upper limb
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %)*5@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon's upper limb, standard set time @code{%)*5@var{argument}} special text
Standard set time of Moon's upper limb
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %[5@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon's upper limb, visibility standard @code{%[5@var{argument}} special text
Period of standard visibility,
Moon's upper limb above reference altitude,
in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %[*5@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon's upper limb, visibility standard @code{%[*5@var{argument}} special text
Period of standard visibility,
Moon's upper limb above reference altitude,
in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %]5@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon's upper limb, non-visibility standard @code{%]5@var{argument}} special text
Period of standard non-visibility,
Moon's upper limb below reference altitude,
in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %]*5@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon's upper limb, non-visibility standard @code{%]*5@var{argument}} special text
Period of standard non-visibility,
Moon's upper limb below reference altitude,
in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %(6@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)6@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric horizontal parallax @code{%(6@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric horizontal parallax @code{%)6@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric horizontal parallax of Moon in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*6@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*6@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric horizontal parallax @code{%(*6@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric horizontal parallax @code{%)*6@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric horizontal parallax of Moon in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(7@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)7@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric semidiameter @code{%(7@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric semidiameter @code{%)7@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric semidiameter of Moon in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*7@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*7@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric semidiameter @code{%(*7@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric semidiameter @code{%)*7@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric semidiameter of Moon in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(8@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)8@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %(*8@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*8@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric brightness @code{%(8@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric brightness @code{%)8@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric brightness @code{%(*8@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric brightness @code{%)*8@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric brightness of Moon in magnitude units
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %(9@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)9@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric phase angle @code{%(9@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric phase angle @code{%)9@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric phase angle of Moon
in range @w{0.0@dots{}1.0}
in @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %(*9@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*9@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric phase angle @code{%(*9@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric phase angle @code{%)*9@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric phase angle of Moon as percent value
in range @w{0.0@dots{}100.0}
in @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %(a@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)a@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric elevation @code{%(a@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric elevation @code{%)a@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric elevation of Moon in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*a@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*a@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric elevation @code{%(*a@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric elevation @code{%)*a@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric elevation of Moon in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(b@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)b@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric azimuth @code{%(b@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric azimuth @code{%)b@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric azimuth of Moon in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*b@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*b@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric azimuth @code{%)*b@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric azimuth @code{%(*b@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric azimuth of Moon in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(c@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)c@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric declination @code{%(c@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric declination @code{%)c@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric declination of Moon in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*c@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*c@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric declination @code{%(*c@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric declination @code{%)*c@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric declination of Moon in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(d@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)d@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric ecliptic longitude @code{%(d@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric ecliptic longitude @code{%)d@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric ecliptic longitude of Moon in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*d@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*d@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric ecliptic longitude @code{%(*d@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric ecliptic longitude @code{%)*d@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric ecliptic longitude of Moon in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(e@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)e@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric ecliptic latitude @code{%(e@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric ecliptic latitude @code{%)e@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric ecliptic latitude of Moon in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*e@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*e@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric ecliptic latitude @code{%(*e@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric ecliptic latitude @code{%)*e@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric ecliptic latitude of Moon in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(f@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)f@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric right ascension @code{%(f@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric right ascension @code{%)f@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric right ascension of Moon
as time value in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*f@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*f@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric right ascension @code{%(*f@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric right ascension @code{%)*f@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric right ascension of Moon
as time value in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %(g@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)g@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric distance @code{%(g@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric distance @code{%)g@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric distance of Moon in mean Earth equator radii
in @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %(*g@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*g@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric distance @code{%(*g@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric distance @code{%)*g@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric distance of Moon in kilometers
in @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %(h@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)h@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric elongation @code{%(h@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric elongation @code{%)h@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric elongation of Moon in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*h@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*h@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric elongation @code{%(*h@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric elongation @code{%)*h@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric elongation of Moon in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(i@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)i@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, refraction @code{%(i@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, refraction @code{%)i@var{argument}} special text
Atmospheric refraction in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*i@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*i@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, refraction @code{%(*i@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, refraction @code{%)*i@var{argument}} special text
Atmospheric refraction in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(j@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)j@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric horizontal parallax @code{%(j@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric horizontal parallax @code{%)j@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric horizontal parallax of Moon in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*j@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*j@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric horizontal parallax @code{%(*j@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric horizontal parallax @code{%)*j@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric horizontal parallax of Moon in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(k@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)k@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric semidiameter @code{%(k@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric semidiameter @code{%)k@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric semidiameter of Moon in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*k@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*k@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric semidiameter @code{%(*k@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric semidiameter @code{%)*k@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric semidiameter of Moon in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(l@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)l@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %(*l@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*l@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric brightness @code{%(l@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric brightness @code{%)l@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric brightness @code{%(*l@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric brightness @code{%)*l@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric brightness of Moon in magnitude units
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %(m@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)m@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric phase angle @code{%(m@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric phase angle @code{%)m@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric phase angle of Moon
in range @w{0.0@dots{}1.0}
in @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %(*m@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*m@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric phase angle @code{%(*m@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric phase angle @code{%)*m@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric phase angle of Moon as percent value
in range @w{0.0@dots{}100.0}
in @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %(n@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)n@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric elevation @code{%(n@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric elevation @code{%)n@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric elevation of Moon in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*n@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*n@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric elevation @code{%(*n@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric elevation @code{%)*n@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric elevation of Moon in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(o@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)o@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric azimuth @code{%(o@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric azimuth @code{%)o@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric azimuth of Moon in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*o@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*o@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric azimuth @code{%)*o@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric azimuth @code{%(*o@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric azimuth of Moon in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(p@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)p@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric declination @code{%(p@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric declination @code{%)p@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric declination of Moon in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*p@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*p@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric declination @code{%(*p@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric declination @code{%)*p@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric declination of Moon in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(q@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)q@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric ecliptic longitude @code{%(q@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric ecliptic longitude @code{%)q@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric ecliptic longitude of Moon in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*q@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*q@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric ecliptic longitude @code{%(*q@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric ecliptic longitude @code{%)*q@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric ecliptic longitude of Moon in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(r@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)r@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric ecliptic latitude @code{%(r@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric ecliptic latitude @code{%)r@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric ecliptic latitude of Moon in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*r@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*r@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric ecliptic latitude @code{%(*r@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric ecliptic latitude @code{%)*r@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric ecliptic latitude of Moon in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(s@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)s@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric right ascension @code{%(s@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric right ascension @code{%)s@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric right ascension of Moon
as time value in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*s@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*s@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric right ascension @code{%(*s@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric right ascension @code{%)*s@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric right ascension of Moon
as time value in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %(t@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)t@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric distance @code{%(t@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric distance @code{%)t@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric distance of Moon in mean Earth equator radii
in @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %(*t@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*t@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric distance @code{%(*t@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric distance @code{%)*t@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric distance of Moon in kilometers
in @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %(u@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)u@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric elongation @code{%(u@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric elongation @code{%)u@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric elongation of Moon in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*u@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*u@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric elongation @code{%(*u@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric elongation @code{%)*u@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric elongation of Moon in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(v@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)v@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %(*v@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*v@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, delta-t @code{%(v@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, delta-t @code{%)v@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, delta-t @code{%)*v@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, delta-t @code{%(*v@var{argument}} special text
Delta-t in seconds
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %(w@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)w@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, local sidereal time @code{%(w@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, local sidereal time @code{%)w@var{argument}} special text
Local sidereal time
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{24-hours}} format

@item %(*w@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*w@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, local sidereal time @code{%(*w@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, local sidereal time @code{%)*w@var{argument}} special text
Local sidereal time
in @w{@code{@var{hh}:@var{mm}}} @w{@emph{12-hours}} format with time suffix

@item %(x@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)x@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, base time @code{%(x@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, base time @code{%)x@var{argument}} special text
Base time as time value in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*x@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*x@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, base time @code{%(*x@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, base time @code{%)*x@var{argument}} special text
Base time as time value in decimal hours
in @w{@code{@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %(y@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)y@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %(*y@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*y@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, Julian date @code{%(y@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, Julian date @code{%)y@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, Julian date @code{%(*y@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, Julian date @code{%)*y@var{argument}} special text
Julian date in days
in @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %(z@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)z@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %(*z@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*z@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, Julian Ephemeris date @code{%(z@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, Julian Ephemeris date @code{%)z@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, Julian Ephemeris date @code{%(*z@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, Julian Ephemeris date @code{%)*z@var{argument}} special text
Julian Ephemeris date in days
in @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %(A@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)A@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta topocentric elevation @code{%(A@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta topocentric elevation @code{%)A@var{argument}} special text
Delta topocentric elevation of Moon/Sun
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*A@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*A@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta topocentric elevation @code{%(*A@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta topocentric elevation @code{%)*A@var{argument}} special text
Delta topocentric elevation of Moon/Sun
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(B@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)B@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta topocentric azimuth @code{%(B@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta topocentric azimuth @code{%)B@var{argument}} special text
Delta topocentric azimuth of Moon/Sun
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*B@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*B@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta topocentric azimuth @code{%(*B@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta topocentric azimuth @code{%)*B@var{argument}} special text
Delta topocentric azimuth of Moon/Sun
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(C@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)C@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta geocentric elevation @code{%(C@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta geocentric elevation @code{%)C@var{argument}} special text
Delta geocentric elevation of Moon/Sun
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*C@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*C@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta geocentric elevation @code{%(*C@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta geocentric elevation @code{%)*C@var{argument}} special text
Delta geocentric elevation of Moon/Sun
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(D@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)D@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta geocentric azimuth @code{%(D@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta geocentric azimuth @code{%)D@var{argument}} special text
Delta geocentric azimuth of Moon/Sun
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*D@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*D@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta geocentric azimuth @code{%(*D@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta geocentric azimuth @code{%)*D@var{argument}} special text
Delta geocentric azimuth of Moon/Sun
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(E@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta topocentric elevation at standard moonrise time @code{%(E@var{argument}} special text
Delta topocentric elevation of Moon/Sun
at standard moonrise time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*E@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta topocentric elevation at standard moonrise time @code{%(*E@var{argument}} special text
Delta topocentric elevation of Moon/Sun
at standard moonrise time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %)E@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta topocentric elevation at standard moonset time @code{%)E@var{argument}} special text
Delta topocentric elevation of Moon/Sun
at standard moonset time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %)*E@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta topocentric elevation at standard moonset time @code{%)*E@var{argument}} special text
Delta topocentric elevation of Moon/Sun
at standard moonset time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(F@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta topocentric azimuth at standard moonrise time @code{%(F@var{argument}} special text
Delta topocentric azimuth of Moon/Sun
at standard moonrise time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*F@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta topocentric azimuth at standard moonrise time @code{%(*F@var{argument}} special text
Delta topocentric azimuth of Moon/Sun
at standard moonrise time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %)F@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta topocentric azimuth at standard moonset time @code{%)F@var{argument}} special text
Delta topocentric azimuth of Moon/Sun
at standard moonset time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %)*F@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta topocentric azimuth at standard moonset time @code{%)*F@var{argument}} special text
Delta topocentric azimuth of Moon/Sun
at standard moonset time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(G@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta geocentric elevation at standard moonrise time @code{%(G@var{argument}} special text
Delta geocentric elevation of Moon/Sun
at standard moonrise time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*G@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta geocentric elevation at standard moonrise time @code{%(*G@var{argument}} special text
Delta geocentric elevation of Moon/Sun
at standard moonrise time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %)G@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta geocentric elevation at standard moonset time @code{%)G@var{argument}} special text
Delta geocentric elevation of Moon/Sun
at standard moonset time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %)*G@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta geocentric elevation at standard moonset time @code{%)*G@var{argument}} special text
Delta geocentric elevation of Moon/Sun
at standard moonset time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(H@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta geocentric azimuth at standard moonrise time @code{%(H@var{argument}} special text
Delta geocentric azimuth of Moon/Sun
at standard moonrise time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*H@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta geocentric azimuth at standard moonrise time @code{%(*H@var{argument}} special text
Delta geocentric azimuth of Moon/Sun
at standard moonrise time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %)H@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta geocentric azimuth at standard moonset time @code{%)H@var{argument}} special text
Delta geocentric azimuth of Moon/Sun
at standard moonset time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %)*H@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta geocentric azimuth at standard moonset time @code{%)*H@var{argument}} special text
Delta geocentric azimuth of Moon/Sun
at standard moonset time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(I@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)I@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta astronomical midnight time @code{%(I@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta astronomical midnight time @code{%)I@var{argument}} special text
Delta astronomical midnight time of Moon/Sun
as time value in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*I@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*I@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta astronomical midnight time @code{%(*I@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta astronomical midnight time @code{%)*I@var{argument}} special text
Delta astronomical midnight time of Moon/Sun
as time value in decimal hours
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %(J@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)J@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta astronomical noon time @code{%(J@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta astronomical noon time @code{%)J@var{argument}} special text
Delta astronomical noon time of Moon/Sun
as time value in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*J@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*J@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta astronomical noon time @code{%(*J@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta astronomical noon time @code{%)*J@var{argument}} special text
Delta astronomical noon time of Moon/Sun
as time value in decimal hours
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %(K@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta standard rise time @code{%(K@var{argument}} special text
Delta time standard rise of Moon/Sun
at standard moonrise time
as time value in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*K@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta standard rise time @code{%(*K@var{argument}} special text
Delta time standard rise of Moon/Sun
at standard moonrise time
as time value in decimal hours
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %)K@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta standard set time @code{%)K@var{argument}} special text
Delta time standard set of of Moon/Sun
at standard moonset time
as time value in hours and minutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{hh}h@var{mm}'}} format

@item %)*K@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon/Sun, delta standard set time @code{%)*K@var{argument}} special text
Delta time standard set of of Moon/Sun
at standard moonset time
as time value in decimal hours
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{hh}.@var{h}@dots{}}} format

@item %(L@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)L@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric elevation at Moon's astronomical midnight time @code{%(L@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric elevation at Moon's astronomical midnight time @code{%)L@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric elevation of Moon
at Moon's astronomical midnight time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*L@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*L@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric elevation at Moon's astronomical midnight time @code{%(*L@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric elevation at Moon's astronomical midnight time @code{%)*L@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric elevation of Moon
at Moon's astronomical midnight time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(M@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)M@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric phase angle at Moon's astronomical midnight time @code{%(M@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric phase angle at Moon's astronomical midnight time @code{%)M@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric phase angle of Moon
at Moon's astronomical midnight time
in range @w{0.0@dots{}1.0}
in @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %(*M@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*M@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric phase angle at Moon's astronomical midnight time @code{%(*M@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric phase angle at Moon's astronomical midnight time @code{%)*M@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric phase angle of Moon
at Moon's astronomical midnight time
as percent value
in range @w{0.0@dots{}100.0}
in @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %(N@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)N@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric elevation at Moon's astronomical noon time @code{%(N@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric elevation at Moon's astronomical noon time @code{%)N@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric elevation of Moon
at Moon's astronomical noon time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*N@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*N@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric elevation at Moon's astronomical noon time @code{%(*N@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric elevation at Moon's astronomical noon time @code{%)*N@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric elevation of Moon
at Moon's astronomical noon time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(O@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)O@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric phase angle at Moon's astronomical noon time @code{%(O@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric phase angle at Moon's astronomical noon time @code{%)O@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric phase angle of Moon
at Moon's astronomical noon time
in range @w{0.0@dots{}1.0}
in @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %(*O@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*O@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric phase angle at Moon's astronomical noon time @code{%(*O@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, topocentric phase angle at Moon's astronomical noon time @code{%)*O@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric phase angle of Moon
at Moon's astronomical noon time
as percent value
in range @w{0.0@dots{}100.0}
in @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %(K@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric elevation at standard rise time @code{%(P@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric elevation of Moon
at standard moonrise time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*P@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric elevation at standard rise time @code{%(*P@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric elevation of Moon
at standard moonrise time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %)P@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric elevation at standard set time @code{%)P@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric elevation of Moon
at standard moonset time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %)*P@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric elevation at standard set time @code{%)*P@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric elevation of Moon
at standard moonset time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(Q@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric azimuth at standard rise time @code{%(Q@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric azimuth of Moon
at standard moonrise time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*Q@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric azimuth at standard rise time @code{%(*Q@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric azimuth of Moon
at standard moonrise time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %)Q@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric azimuth at standard set time @code{%)Q@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric azimuth of Moon
at standard moonset time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %)*Q@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric azimuth at standard set time @code{%)*Q@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric azimuth of Moon
at standard moonset time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(R@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric phase angle at standard rise time @code{%(R@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric phase angle of Moon
at standard moonrise time
in range @w{0.0@dots{}1.0}
in @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %(*R@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric phase angle at standard rise time @code{%(*R@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric phase angle of Moon
at standard moonrise time
as percent value
in range @w{0.0@dots{}100.0}
in @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %)R@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric phase angle at standard set time @code{%)R@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric phase angle of Moon
at standard moonset time
in range @w{0.0@dots{}1.0}
in @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %)*R@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, topocentric phase angle at standard set time @code{%)*R@var{argument}} special text
Topocentric phase angle of Moon
at standard moonset time
as percent value
in range @w{0.0@dots{}100.0}
in @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %(S@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)S@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric elevation at Moon's astronomical midnight time @code{%(S@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric elevation at Moon's astronomical midnight time @code{%)S@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric elevation of Moon
at Moon's astronomical midnight time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*S@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*S@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric elevation at Moon's astronomical midnight time @code{%(*S@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric elevation at Moon's astronomical midnight time @code{%)*S@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric elevation of Moon
at Moon's astronomical midnight time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(T@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)T@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric phase angle at Moon's astronomical midnight time @code{%(T@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric phase angle at Moon's astronomical midnight time @code{%)T@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric phase angle of Moon
at Moon's astronomical midnight time
in range @w{0.0@dots{}1.0}
in @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %(*T@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*T@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric phase angle at Moon's astronomical midnight time @code{%(*T@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric phase angle at Moon's astronomical midnight time @code{%)*T@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric phase angle of Moon
at Moon's astronomical midnight time
as percent value
in range @w{0.0@dots{}100.0}
in @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %(U@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)U@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric elevation at Moon's astronomical noon time @code{%(U@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric elevation at Moon's astronomical noon time @code{%)U@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric elevation of Moon
at Moon's astronomical noon time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*U@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*U@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric elevation at Moon's astronomical noon time @code{%(*U@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric elevation at Moon's astronomical noon time @code{%)*U@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric elevation of Moon
at Moon's astronomical noon time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(V@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)V@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric phase angle at Moon's astronomical noon time @code{%(V@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric phase angle at Moon's astronomical noon time @code{%)V@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric phase angle of Moon
at Moon's astronomical noon time
in range @w{0.0@dots{}1.0}
in @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %(*V@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@itemx %)*V@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric phase angle at Moon's astronomical noon time @code{%(*V@var{argument}} special text
@cindex Moon, geocentric phase angle at Moon's astronomical noon time @code{%)*V@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric phase angle of Moon
at Moon's astronomical noon time
as percent value
in range @w{0.0@dots{}100.0}
in @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %(W@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric elevation at standard rise time @code{%(W@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric elevation of Moon
at standard moonrise time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*W@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric elevation at standard rise time @code{%(*W@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric elevation of Moon
at standard moonrise time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %)W@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric elevation at standard set time @code{%)W@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric elevation of Moon
at standard moonset time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %)*W@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric elevation at standard set time @code{%)*W@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric elevation of Moon
at standard moonset time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{+@r{|}-@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(X@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric azimuth at standard rise time @code{%(X@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric azimuth of Moon
at standard moonrise time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %(*X@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric azimuth at standard rise time @code{%(*X@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric azimuth of Moon
at standard moonrise time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %)X@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric azimuth at standard set time @code{%)X@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric azimuth of Moon
at standard moonset time
in degrees and arcminutes
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}d@var{mm}'}} format

@item %)*X@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric azimuth at standard set time @code{%)*X@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric azimuth of Moon
at standard moonset time
in decimal degrees
in @w{@code{@var{ddd}.@var{d}@dots{}}} format

@item %(Y@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric phase angle at standard rise time @code{%(Y@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric phase angle of Moon
at standard moonrise time
in range @w{0.0@dots{}1.0}
in @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %(*Y@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric phase angle at standard rise time @code{%(*Y@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric phase angle of Moon
at standard moonrise time
as percent value
in range @w{0.0@dots{}100.0}
in @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %)Y@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric phase angle at standard set time @code{%)Y@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric phase angle of Moon
at standard moonset time
in range @w{0.0@dots{}1.0}
in @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format

@item %)*Y@var{@acronym{ISO}-6709:1983-co-ordinate}@r{[},@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{mmmm}@r{|}@var{hh}:@r{[}@var{mm}@r{]]}
@cindex Moon, geocentric phase angle at standard set time @code{%)*Y@var{argument}} special text
Geocentric phase angle of Moon
at standard moonset time
as percent value
in range @w{0.0@dots{}100.0}
in @w{@code{@var{n}.@var{n}@dots{}}} format
@end table

@item @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}-@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}}
@cindex Environment variable @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}-@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text
Contents of environment variable

@item @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}} difference value
@cindex Difference value @code{%@r{[}@var{format}@r{]}@var{?}} special texts

@table @code
@item %d
@cindex Relative day number @code{%d} special text
Relative day number

@item %w
@cindex Relative week number @code{%w} special text
Relative week number

@item %m
@cindex Relative month number @code{%m} special text
Relative month number

@item %y
@cindex Relative year number @code{%y} special text
Relative year number
@end table

@item @code{%@var{?}} highlighting
@cindex Highlighting @code{%@var{?}} special texts

@table @code
@item %1
@cindex Start of highlighting sequence 1 @code{%1} special text
Start of highlighting sequence 1

@item %2
@cindex End of highlighting sequence 1 @code{%2} special text
End of highlighting sequence 1

@item %3
@cindex Start of highlighting sequence 2 @code{%3} special text
Start of highlighting sequence 2

@item %4
@cindex End of highlighting sequence 2 @code{%4} special text
End of highlighting sequence 2

@item %5
@cindex Start of highlighting sequence 1 @code{%5} special text
Start of highlighting sequence 1 if a fixed date is on today's date

@item %6
@cindex End of highlighting sequence 1 @code{%6} special text
End of highlighting sequence 1 if a fixed date is on today's date

@item %7
@cindex Start of highlighting sequence 2 @code{%7} special text
Start of highlighting sequence 2 if a fixed date is on a legal holiday date

@item %8
@cindex End of highlighting sequence 2 @code{%8} special text
End of highlighting sequence 2 if a fixed date is on a legal holiday date

@item %9
@cindex Start of highlighting sequence 1 or 2 @code{%9} special text
Start of highlighting sequence 1 if a fixed date is on today's date, otherwise
start of highlighting sequence 2 if a fixed date is on a legal holiday date

@item %0
@cindex End of highlighting sequence 1 or 2 @code{%0} special text
End of highlighting sequence 1 if a fixed date is on today's date, otherwise
end of highlighting sequence 2 if a fixed date is on a legal holiday date
@end table

@item @code{%!@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}}
@cindex Shell command @code{%!@r{[}@var{argument}@r{]}} special text
Shell executes @var{argument} as a command
@end table

@node Obsolete Special Texts, Format Instruction, Special Texts Summary, Top
@appendix Obsolete Special Texts and Format Elements
@cindex Obsolete special texts and format elements
@cindex Special texts, obsolete
@cindex Format elements, obsolete

@menu
* Table of Obsolete Special Texts::
* Table of Obsolete Date Format Elements::
* Table of Obsolete Date Formats::
@end menu

Because Gcal @value{GCAL-VERSION} is able to represent most special texts
which may occur in the text part of a resource file line
(@pxref{Special Texts, , Description of all @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} Special Texts}),
and most of the format elements as they may be used in the date format text
of the @option{--date-format}
@xref{x-date-format, , Calendar option @option{--date-format=de@r{|}us@r{|}gb@r{|}@var{text}}},
by using a format instruction, some of them ---mainly introduced in the Gcal
versions 2.20 and 2.40--- are obsolete now.  The following complete tables
of all these obsolete special texts respectively format elements with their
new representation, as used by Gcal @value{GCAL-VERSION} now, show the changes
made.

@page
@node Table of Obsolete Special Texts, Table of Obsolete Date Format Elements, Obsolete Special Texts, Obsolete Special Texts
@appendixsec Table of Obsolete Special Texts
@tbindex Obsolete special texts
@tbindex Special texts, obsolete
@cindex Table of obsolete special texts
@cindex Obsolete special texts, table
@cindex Special texts

This table opposes all obsolete special texts as they may be used in the
text part of a resource file line
(@pxref{Special Texts, , Description of all @code{%@var{?}}@dots{} Special Texts}),
and their new representation, as used by Gcal @value{GCAL-VERSION} now:
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

@multitable @columnfractions .60 .18 .04 .18
@item @strong{Symbolic name}
@tab @strong{Old-style}
@tab
@tab @strong{New-style}
@item @
@item %complete weekday name
@tab @code{%o}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%K}
@item %3-letter weekday name
@tab @code{%O}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%>3#K}
@item %2-letter weekday name
@tab @code{%K}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%>2#K}
@item %weekday number (Mon=1@dots{}Sun=7)
@tab @code{%S}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%W}
@item %weekday number (Mon=1@dots{}Sun=7) @var{ONS}
@tab @code{%I}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%>1&*W}
@item %weekday number (Mon=0@dots{}Sun=6) @var{ONS}
@tab @code{%J}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%>1&*E}
@item %weekday number (Sun=1@dots{}Sat=7)
@tab @code{%(}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%I}
@item %weekday number (Sun=1@dots{}Sat=7) @var{ONS}
@tab @code{%<}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%>1&*I}
@item %weekday number (Sun=0@dots{}Sat=6)
@tab @code{%)}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%J}
@item %weekday number (Sun=0@dots{}Sat=6) @var{ONS}
@tab @code{%>}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%>1&*J}
@item %weekday number (Mon=1@dots{}Sun=7) @var{FLX}
@tab @code{%[}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%S}
@item %weekday number (Mon=1@dots{}Sun=7) @var{FLX} @var{ONS}
@tab @code{%@{}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%>1&*S}
@item %weekday number (Mon=0@dots{}Sun=6) @var{FLX}
@tab @code{%]}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%T}
@item %weekday number (Mon=0@dots{}Sun=6) @var{FLX} @var{ONS}
@tab @code{%@}}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%>1&*T}
@item %day-of-year number
@tab @code{%+}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%N}
@item %day-of-year number @var{+LZ}
@tab @code{%*}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%>03*N}
@item %day-of-year number @var{ONS}
@tab @code{%&}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%>1&*N}
@item %day-of-year number @var{+LZ} @var{ONS}
@tab @code{%#}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%>03&*N}
@item %day number @var{+LZ}
@tab @code{%N}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%>02*D}
@item %day number @var{ONS}
@tab @code{%s}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%>1&*D}
@item %day number @var{+LZ} @var{ONS}
@tab @code{%u}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%>02&*D}
@item %complete month name
@tab @code{%M}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%U}
@item %3-letter month name
@tab @code{%T}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%>3#U}
@item %month number
@tab @code{%U}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%M}
@item %month number @var{+LZ}
@tab @code{%W}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%>02*M}
@item %month number @var{ONS}
@tab @code{%z}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%>1&*M}
@item %month number @var{+LZ} @var{ONS}
@tab @code{%Z}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%>02&*M}
@item %complete year number @var{+LZ}
@tab @code{%=}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%>04*Y}
@item %age value (birthday) number
@tab @code{%b}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%B}
@item %age value (birthday) number @var{ONS}
@tab @code{%B}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%>1&*B}
@item %moon phase
@tab @code{%-}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%O}
@item %moon phase @var{+LZ}
@tab @code{%_}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%>03*O}
@item %moon phase text graphics image
@tab @code{%:}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%Z}
@end multitable

@noindent
Legend:

@multitable @columnfractions .05 .05 .9
@item @var{+LZ}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab With leading zero(es)
@item @var{FLX}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab Flexible starting day of week
(@pxref{x-starting-day, , Calendar option @option{--starting-day=@var{argument}}})
@item @var{ONS}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab With Ordinal Number suffix
@end multitable

@page
@node Table of Obsolete Date Format Elements, Table of Obsolete Date Formats, Table of Obsolete Special Texts, Obsolete Special Texts
@appendixsec Table of Obsolete Date Format Elements
@tbindex Obsolete individual date format elements
@tbindex Date format elements, obsolete individual
@cindex Table of obsolete date format elements
@cindex Obsolete date format elements, table
@cindex Date format elements
@cindex Date format texts, individual
@cindex Individual date format texts
@cindex Obsolete date format texts, individual
@cindex Obsolete individual date format texts

This table opposes all obsolete date format elements as they may be used
in the date format text of the @option{--date-format} option
(@pxref{x-date-format, , Calendar option @option{--date-format=de@r{|}us@r{|}gb@r{|}@var{text}}}),
and their new representation, as used by Gcal @value{GCAL-VERSION} now:
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@multitable @columnfractions .5 .18 .04 .28
@item @strong{Symbolic name}
@tab @strong{Old-style}
@tab
@tab @strong{New-style}
@item @
@item %day number
@tab @code{%d}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%>02*D}
@item %day number @var{+LS}
@tab @code{%D}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%>2*D}
@item %day number @var{+LZ} @var{ONS}
@tab @code{%u}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%02&*D}
@item %day number @var{+LS} @var{ONS}
@tab @code{%U}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%>2&*D}
@item %complete month name
@tab @code{%B}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%U}
@item %3-letter month name
@tab @code{%b}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%<3#U}
@item %month number @var{+LZ}
@tab @code{%m}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%>02*M}
@item %month number @var{+LS}
@tab @code{%M}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%>2*M}
@item %complete year number @var{+LZ}
@tab @code{%y}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%>04*Y}
@item %complete year number @var{+LZ}
@tab @code{%Y}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%>4*Y}
@item %last-2-digits year number @var{+LZ}
@tab @code{%z}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%>02#Y}
@item %last-2-digits year number @var{+LS}
@tab @code{%Z}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%>2#Y}
@item %complete weekday name
@tab @code{%A}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%K}
@item %3-letter weekday name
@tab @code{%W}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%<3#K}
@item %2-letter weekday name
@tab @code{%w}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%<2#K}
@end multitable

@noindent
Legend:

@multitable @columnfractions .05 .05 .9
@item @var{+LZ}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab With leading zero(es)
@item @var{+LS}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab With leading space(s)
@item @var{ONS}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab With Ordinal Number suffix
@end multitable

@node Table of Obsolete Date Formats, , Table of Obsolete Date Format Elements, Obsolete Special Texts
@appendixsec Table of Obsolete Date Formats
@tbindex Obsolete fixed date formats
@tbindex Date formats, obsolete fixed
@cindex Table of obsolete date formats
@cindex Obsolete date formats, table
@cindex Format elements
@cindex Obsolete fixed default date format texts, table
@cindex Table of obsolete fixed default date format texts
@cindex Date format texts, fixed default
@cindex Fixed default date format texts
@cindex Obsolete date format texts, fixed default
@cindex Obsolete fixed default date format texts

This table opposes all obsolete date format texts as they may be used
in the fixed defaults of the country specific date formats of the
@option{--date-format} option for German users, U.S.@: american users
and users in Great Britain
(@pxref{x-date-format, , Calendar option @option{--date-format=de@r{|}us@r{|}gb@r{|}@var{text}}}),
and their new representation, as used by Gcal @value{GCAL-VERSION} now:
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@multitable @columnfractions .1 .3 .04 .56
@item @strong{CC}
@tab @strong{Old-style}
@tab
@tab @strong{New-style}
@item @
@item DE
@tab @code{%w,  %1%D%2 %b %y}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%<2#K,  %1%>2*D%2 %<3#U %>04*Y}
@item US
@tab @code{%W, %b  %1%U%2 %y}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%<3#K, %<3#U  %1%>2&*D%2 %>04*Y}
@item GB
@tab @code{%W,  %1%U%2 %b %y}
@tab @equiv{}
@tab @code{%<3#K,  %1%>2&*D%2 %<3#U %>04*Y}
@end multitable

@node Format Instruction, Coding Scheme, Obsolete Special Texts, Top
@appendix Format Instruction
@tbindex Format Instruction
@cindex Format instruction, description
@cindex Description of format instruction

Gcal @value{GCAL-VERSION} is able to represent text variables, special texts
and date formats especially in a very comfortable and uniform manner by using
a format instruction.

Here comes the description of the format instruction components, now called
@var{format} in the further context.  In general, the template of a format
instruction is:
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@quotation
@w{@var{alignment} @r{[}@var{sign}@r{] [}@var{zero}@r{]} @var{width} @r{[}@var{style}@r{]} @r{[}@var{suffix}@r{]} @var{format}}
@end quotation
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

If a @var{format} of above mentioned template is used, its components must be
specified in the above mentioned order, at which the definition of the
components embraced by @w{@samp{[ ]}} is of course optional.  The single
components of the format instruction are assembled as follows:
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@multitable @columnfractions .15 .85
@item @strong{Character}
@tab @strong{Description of the components}
@item @
@item
@tab @var{Alignment} group (exactly one member must be defined):
@item @code{<}
@tab Field contents is placed at the left margin of the field
by using the width @var{width}
@item @code{:}
@tab Field contents is placed in centered manner in the field
by using the width @var{width}
@item @code{>}
@tab Field contents is placed at the right margin of the field
by using the width @var{width}
@item @
@item
@tab @var{Sign} (may be defined):
@item @code{+}
@tab Numerical value is provided with leading sign
@item @
@item
@tab @var{Zero} (may be defined):
@item @code{0}
@tab Numerical value is filled with leading zero(es)
@item @
@item
@tab @var{Width} (must be defined):
@item @var{n}
@tab Field has the width @var{n} (actual range 1@dots{}256)@.
@item @
@item
@tab @var{Style} group (exactly one member may be defined):
@item @code{u}
@tab Field contents is converted to upper-case letters
@item @code{l}
@tab Field contents is converted to lower-case letters
@item @code{w}
@tab Field contents is converted to capitalized words
@item @
@item
@tab @var{Suffix} (may be defined):
@item @code{&}
@tab Numerical value is provided with an Ordinal Number suffix
@item @
@item
@tab @var{Format} group (exactly one member must be defined):
@item @code{*}
@tab Field contents is not cut after position @var{width}
@item @code{#}
@tab Field contents is cut after position @var{width}
@end multitable
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

If a given @var{width} component is greater 256 but less than 999, a field
width of 256 is assumed.  But if a given @var{width} component is zero, this
interrupts the interpretation phase of Gcal so that the complete @var{format}
is not interpreted anymore and is therefore displayed respectively assigned as
is.  The same happens if a component is misspelled, given in wrong order, or
one of the required components is unspecified.
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

Furthermore, a @var{style} component may be specified case-independently.
@xref{x-translate-string, , Calendar option @option{--translate-string=@var{text}}},
for further annotations how the @var{style} component is used correctly.

@node Coding Scheme, Environment Variables, Format Instruction, Top
@appendix Coding Scheme
@cindex Coding scheme of resource file
@cindex Resource file, coding scheme
@cindex Resource file, date part

@menu
* Coding Scheme Table 1::
* Coding Scheme Table 2::
@end menu

The following coding scheme tables explain the relations between the
@emph{date part} @w{(@var{yyyy}@dots{})} of a resource file line and
the modifiers, the short-style option @w{@option{-c@r{|}C@r{[]}}} ---which
is used for enabling the fixed date feature--- respectively the
@w{@option{--period-of-fixed-dates=@var{argument}}} long-style option
may have, i.e.@: they point out all possible correspondences.  This is
necessary because Gcal does not respect all entries found in a resource
file if a @emph{fixed date} argument is given, it respects only those
entries which have a definite relation to the @emph{fixed date} argument
to avoid the output of redundant information!
@xref{x-period-of-fixed-dates, , Fixed dates option @option{--period-of-fixed-dates=@var{argument}}},
for further details.
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@noindent
In the @emph{date part} @var{yyyy}@dots{}:

@table @var
@item yyyy
represents any year number @w{(@code{0001@r{@dots{}}9999})@.}

@item mm
represents any month number @w{(@code{01@r{@dots{}}12}} or @code{99})
respectively any textual short month name with length of 3 characters
(@code{Jan}, @code{Feb}@dots{})@.

@item dd
represents any day number @w{(@code{01@r{@dots{}}28}}, @code{29}, @code{30},
@code{31} or @code{99})@.

@item www
represents any textual short weekday name with length of 2@dots{}3 characters
@w{(@code{Mon@r{@dots{}}Sun})@.}

@item ?
represents any case-insensitive single letter.

@item n
represents any positive integer number (one or more digits)@.
@end table

@page
@node Coding Scheme Table 1, Coding Scheme Table 2, Coding Scheme, Coding Scheme
@appendixsec Coding Scheme Table 1
@tbindex Date part, coding scheme 1
@tbindex Coding scheme 1, date part
@cindex Coding Scheme Table 1

This table opposes all possible encode variations of a date given in
the @emph{date part} of resource file with all fitting modifiers of the
short-style option @w{@option{-c@r{|}C@r{[]}}}@.
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

@noindent
@strong{Please note:}@*
The
@w{@option{-c},}
@w{@option{-ct},}
@w{@option{-c@var{n}d},}
@w{@option{-c*d@r{|}w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}},}
@w{@option{-c@@@var{?}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]]}},}
@w{@option{-c@var{mm}@var{dd}}} and
@w{@option{-c@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}}} options respect
@strong{all} encode variations of the @emph{date part}!
@iftex
@sp 1
@end iftex

@multitable @columnfractions .35 .65
@item @strong{Date part}
@tab @strong{Short-style option @option{-c@r{|}C@r{[]}}}
@item @
@item @code{00000000}
@tab @w{@code{-c@var{n}+@r{|}-}}
@item @code{000000@var{dd}}
@tab @w{@code{-c@var{n}w@r{|}+@r{|}-},}
@w{@code{-cw@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cm@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}}}
@item @code{0000@var{mm}00}
@tab @w{@code{-c@var{n}+@r{|}-}}
@item @code{0000@var{mm}@var{dd}}
@tab @w{@code{-c@var{n}w@r{|}+@r{|}-},}
@w{@code{-cw@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cm@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cy@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cl@var{n}d@r{|}w@r{|}+@r{|}-},}
@w{@code{-cl*d@r{|}w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cl@@@var{?}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]]}},}
@w{@code{-cl@var{mm}@var{dd}},}
@w{@code{-cl@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}}}
@item @code{@var{yyyy}0000}
@tab @w{@code{-c@var{n}+@r{|}-}}
@item @code{@var{yyyy}00@var{dd}}
@tab @w{@code{-c@var{n}w@r{|}+@r{|}-},}
@w{@code{-cw@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cm@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}}}
@item @code{@var{yyyy}@var{mm}00}
@tab @w{@code{-c@var{n}+@r{|}-}}
@item @code{@var{yyyy}@var{mm}@var{dd}}
@tab @w{@code{-c@var{n}w@r{|}+@r{|}-},}
@w{@code{-cw@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cm@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cy@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cl@var{n}d@r{|}w@r{|}+@r{|}-},}
@w{@code{-cl*d@r{|}w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cl@@@var{?}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]]}},}
@w{@code{-cl@var{mm}@var{dd}},}
@w{@code{-cl@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}}}
@item @code{000000@var{www}@var{n}}
@tab @w{@code{-c@var{n}w@r{|}+@r{|}-},}
@w{@code{-cw@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cm@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}}}
@item @code{0000@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}}
@tab @w{@code{-c@var{n}w@r{|}+@r{|}-},}
@w{@code{-cw@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cm@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cy@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cl@var{n}d@r{|}w@r{|}+@r{|}-},}
@w{@code{-cl*d@r{|}w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cl@@@var{?}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]]}},}
@w{@code{-cl@var{mm}@var{dd}},}
@w{@code{-cl@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}}}
@item @code{@var{yyyy}00@var{www}@var{n}}
@tab @w{@code{-c@var{n}w@r{|}+@r{|}-},}
@w{@code{-cw@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cm@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}}}
@item @code{@var{yyyy}@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}}
@tab @w{@code{-c@var{n}w@r{|}+@r{|}-},}
@w{@code{-cw@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cm@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cy@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cl@var{n}d@r{|}w@r{|}+@r{|}-},}
@w{@code{-cl*d@r{|}w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cl@@@var{?}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]]}},}
@w{@code{-cl@var{mm}@var{dd}},}
@w{@code{-cl@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}}}
@item @code{0000*d@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}}
@tab @w{@code{-c@var{n}w@r{|}+@r{|}-},}
@w{@code{-cw@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cm@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cy@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cl@var{n}d@r{|}w@r{|}+@r{|}-},}
@w{@code{-cl*d@r{|}w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cl@@@var{?}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]]}},}
@w{@code{-cl@var{mm}@var{dd}},}
@w{@code{-cl@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}}}
@item @code{@var{yyyy}*d@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}}
@tab @w{@code{-c@var{n}w@r{|}+@r{|}-},}
@w{@code{-cw@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cm@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cy@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cl@var{n}d@r{|}w@r{|}+@r{|}-},}
@w{@code{-cl*d@r{|}w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cl@@@var{?}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]]}},}
@w{@code{-cl@var{mm}@var{dd}},}
@w{@code{-cl@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}}}
@item @code{0000*w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}}
@tab @w{@code{-c@var{n}w@r{|}+@r{|}-},}
@w{@code{-cw@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cm@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cy@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cl@var{n}d@r{|}w@r{|}+@r{|}-},}
@w{@code{-cl*d@r{|}w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cl@@@var{?}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]]}},}
@w{@code{-cl@var{mm}@var{dd}},}
@w{@code{-cl@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}}}
@item @code{@var{yyyy}*w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}}
@tab @w{@code{-c@var{n}w@r{|}+@r{|}-},}
@w{@code{-cw@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cm@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cy@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cl@var{n}d@r{|}w@r{|}+@r{|}-},}
@w{@code{-cl*d@r{|}w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cl@@@var{?}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]]}},}
@w{@code{-cl@var{mm}@var{dd}},}
@w{@code{-cl@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}}}
@item @code{0000@@@var{?}@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}}
@tab @w{@code{-c@var{n}w@r{|}+@r{|}-},}
@w{@code{-cw@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cm@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cy@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cl@var{n}d@r{|}w@r{|}+@r{|}-},}
@w{@code{-cl*d@r{|}w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cl@@@var{?}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]]}},}
@w{@code{-cl@var{mm}@var{dd}},}
@w{@code{-cl@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}}}
@item @code{@var{yyyy}@@@var{?}@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}}
@tab @w{@code{-c@var{n}w@r{|}+@r{|}-},}
@w{@code{-cw@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cm@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cy@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cl@var{n}d@r{|}w@r{|}+@r{|}-},}
@w{@code{-cl*d@r{|}w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}},}
@w{@code{-cl@@@var{?}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]]}},}
@w{@code{-cl@var{mm}@var{dd}},}
@w{@code{-cl@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}}}
@end multitable

@page
@node Coding Scheme Table 2, , Coding Scheme Table 1, Coding Scheme
@appendixsec Coding Scheme Table 2
@tbindex Date part, coding scheme 2
@tbindex Coding scheme 2, date part
@cindex Coding Scheme Table 2

This table opposes all fitting modifiers of the short-style option
@w{@option{-c@r{|}C@r{[]}}} with all possible encode variations of a
date given in the @emph{date part} of resource file.
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@multitable @columnfractions .35 .65
@item @strong{Short-style option @option{-c@r{|}C@r{[]}}}
@tab @strong{Date part}
@item @
@item @code{-c}
@item @code{-ct}
@item @code{-c@var{n}d@r{|}+@r{|}-}
@item @code{-c@var{mm}@var{dd}}
@item @code{-c@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}}
@item @code{-c*d@r{|}w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}}
@item @code{-c@@@var{?}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]]}}
@tab @w{@code{00000000},}
@w{@code{0000@var{mm}00},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}0000},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@var{mm}00},}
@w{@code{000000@var{dd}},}
@w{@code{0000@var{mm}@var{dd}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}00@var{dd}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@var{mm}@var{dd}},}
@w{@code{000000@var{www}@var{n}},}
@w{@code{0000@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}00@var{www}@var{n}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}},}
@w{@code{0000*d@var{n}},}
@w{@code{0000*d@var{n}@var{www}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}*d@var{n}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}*d@var{n}@var{www}},}
@w{@code{0000*w@var{n}},}
@w{@code{0000*w@var{n}@var{www}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}*w@var{n}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}*w@var{n}@var{www}},}
@w{@code{0000@@@var{?}@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}},}
@w{@code{0000@@@var{?}@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@@@var{?}@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@@@var{?}@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}}}
@item @code{-c@var{n}w}
@item @code{-cw@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}}
@tab @w{@code{000000@var{dd}},}
@w{@code{0000@var{mm}@var{dd}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}00@var{dd}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@var{mm}@var{dd}},}
@w{@code{000000@var{www}@var{n}},}
@w{@code{0000@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}00@var{www}@var{n}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}},}
@w{@code{0000*d@var{n}},}
@w{@code{0000*d@var{n}@var{www}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}*d@var{n}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}*d@var{n}@var{www}},}
@w{@code{0000*w@var{n}},}
@w{@code{0000*w@var{n}@var{www}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}*w@var{n}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}*w@var{n}@var{www}},}
@w{@code{0000@@@var{?}@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}},}
@w{@code{0000@@@var{?}@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@@@var{?}@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@@@var{?}@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}}}
@item @code{-cm@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}}
@tab @w{@code{000000@var{dd}},}
@w{@code{0000@var{mm}@var{dd}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}00@var{dd}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@var{mm}@var{dd}},}
@w{@code{000000@var{www}@var{n}},}
@w{@code{0000@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}00@var{www}@var{n}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}},}
@w{@code{0000*d@var{n}},}
@w{@code{0000*d@var{n}@var{www}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}*d@var{n}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}*d@var{n}@var{www}},}
@w{@code{0000*w@var{n}},}
@w{@code{0000*w@var{n}@var{www}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}*w@var{n}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}*w@var{n}@var{www}},}
@w{@code{0000@@@var{?}@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}},}
@w{@code{0000@@@var{?}@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@@@var{?}@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@@@var{?}@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}}}
@item @code{-cy@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}}
@item @code{-cl@var{n}d@r{|}w@r{|}+@r{|}-}
@item @code{-cl@var{mm}@var{dd}}
@item @code{-cl@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}}
@item @code{-cl*d@r{|}w@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]}}
@item @code{-cl@@@var{?}@r{[[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@r{[}@var{www}@r{]]}}
@tab @w{@code{0000@var{mm}@var{dd}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@var{mm}@var{dd}},}
@w{@code{0000@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@var{mm}@var{www}@var{n}},}
@w{@code{0000*d@var{n}},}
@w{@code{0000*d@var{n}@var{www}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}*d@var{n}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}*d@var{n}@var{www}},}
@w{@code{0000*w@var{n}},}
@w{@code{0000*w@var{n}@var{www}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}*w@var{n}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}*w@var{n}@var{www}},}
@w{@code{0000@@@var{?}@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}},}
@w{@code{0000@@@var{?}@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@@@var{?}@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}},}
@w{@code{@var{yyyy}@@@var{?}@r{[}+@r{|}-@r{]}@var{n}@var{www}}}
@end multitable

@node Environment Variables, Error Codes, Coding Scheme, Top
@appendix Environment Variables
@tbindex Environment variables
@cindex Environment variables, table
@cindex Table of all environment variables
@cindex Respected environment variables, table

@noindent
Here is a table of all environment variables which are used by Gcal:
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@table @env
@item GCAL
@itemx GCAL_OPT
@cindex Environment variable, @env{GCAL}
@cindex @env{GCAL} environment variable
@cindex Environment variable, @env{GCAL_OPT}
@cindex @env{GCAL_OPT} environment variable
@vindex GCAL
@vindex GCAL_OPT
@anchor{x-GCAL}
Flags which are passed to the Gcal program automatically.

@item GCAL_COLUMNS
@itemx COLUMNS
@cindex Environment variable, @env{GCAL_COLUMNS}
@cindex Environment variable, @env{COLUMNS}
@cindex @env{GCAL_COLUMNS} environment variable
@cindex @env{COLUMNS} environment variable
@vindex GCAL_COLUMNS
@vindex COLUMNS
@anchor{x-GCAL_COLUMNS}
@anchor{x-COLUMNS}
Sets the number of columns on the screen.  Takes precedence over the
number of columns specified by the @env{TERM} environment variable or
the system itself.

@item GCAL_DATE_FORMAT
@cindex Environment variable, @env{GCAL_DATE_FORMAT}
@cindex @env{GCAL_DATE_FORMAT} environment variable
@vindex GCAL_DATE_FORMAT
@anchor{x-GCAL_DATE_FORMAT}
Contains the date format text which defines the ordering of a displayed
date.  Takes precedence over the default date format text.

@item GCAL_LINES
@itemx LINES
@cindex Environment variable, @env{GCAL_LINES}
@cindex Environment variable, @env{LINES}
@cindex @env{GCAL_LINES} environment variable
@cindex @env{LINES} environment variable
@vindex GCAL_LINES
@vindex LINES
@anchor{x-GCAL_LINES}
@anchor{x-LINES}
Sets the number of lines on the screen.  Takes precedence over the number of
lines specified by the @env{TERM} environment variable or the system itself.

@item GCAL_SYS_DATADIR
@cindex Environment variable, @env{GCAL_SYS_DATADIR}
@cindex @env{GCAL_SYS_DATADIR} environment variable
@cindex Public-access resource files
@vindex GCAL_SYS_DATADIR
@anchor{x-GCAL_SYS_DATADIR}
Name of a file directory absolute to the @w{@emph{root}/@var{$prefix}}
file directory, where the system-administrator stores common,
@emph{public access} resource files (dates files)@.

@item GCAL_USR_DATADIR
@cindex Environment variable, @env{GCAL_USR_DATADIR}
@cindex @env{GCAL_USR_DATADIR} environment variable
@cindex Private-access resource files
@vindex GCAL_USR_DATADIR
@anchor{x-GCAL_USR_DATADIR}
Name of a file directory relative to the @env{HOME} file directory, where
the user stores personal, respectively @emph{private access} resource files
(dates files)@.  Takes precedence over @w{@env{GCAL_SYS_DATADIR}}@.

@item GCALANSI
@cindex Environment variable, @env{GCALANSI}
@cindex @env{GCALANSI} environment variable
@vindex GCALANSI
@anchor{x-GCALANSI}
If defined or set, @acronym{ANSI} escape highlighting sequences are used
respectively substituted by default if no other highlighting sequences
are defined by command line option or found in the Termcap library.

@item GCALPATH
@cindex Environment variable, @env{GCALPATH}
@cindex @env{GCALPATH} environment variable
@vindex GCALPATH
@anchor{x-GCALPATH}
(@samp{:}) colon-separated list of file directories which are searched
to find the @file{.gcalrc} file.  Takes precedence over @env{HOME},
@w{@env{GCAL_USR_DATADIR}} and @w{@env{GCAL_SYS_DATADIR}}@.

@item GCALPROG
@cindex @env{GCALPROG} environment variable
@cindex Environment variable, @env{GCALPROG}
@vindex GCALPROG
@anchor{x-GCALPROG}
Contains the file name of the executable Gcal program that is used by the
Tcal program to call the Gcal program.  Takes precedence over the file name
@code{gcal} which is burned-in during the compilation step of the Tcal program.
The @env{GCALPROG} environment variable must always be set if the Gcal program
is installed under another name than the standard name @command{gcal},
otherwise Tcal is unable to execute the Gcal program automatically!

@item HOME
@cindex Environment variable, @env{HOME}
@cindex @env{HOME} environment variable
@vindex HOME
@anchor{x-HOME}
Name of the user's home file directory.  This is used to find the
@file{.gcalrc} file.  Takes precedence over @w{@env{GCAL_USR_DATADIR}}
and @w{@env{GCAL_SYS_DATADIR}}@.

@item LANGUAGE
@cindex Environment variable, @env{LANGUAGE}
@cindex @env{LANGUAGE} environment variable
@vindex LANGUAGE
The national language and other cultural-specific conventions used by Gcal
at run-time.  Takes precedence over @w{@env{LC_ALL}}, @w{@env{LC_MESSAGES}}
and @env{LANG}@.

@item LC_ALL
@cindex Environment variable, @env{LC_ALL}
@cindex @env{LC_ALL} environment variable
@vindex LC_ALL
The national language and other cultural-specific conventions used by Gcal
at run-time.  Takes precedence over @w{@env{LC_MESSAGES}} and @env{LANG}@.

@item LC_MESSAGES
@cindex Environment variable, @env{LC_MESSAGES}
@cindex @env{LC_MESSAGES} environment variable
@vindex LC_MESSAGES
The national language and other cultural-specific conventions used by Gcal
at run-time.  Takes precedence over @env{LANG}@.

@item LANG
@cindex Environment variable, @env{LANG}
@cindex @env{LANG} environment variable
@vindex LANG
The national language and other cultural-specific conventions used by Gcal
at run-time.

@item LOGNAME
@cindex Environment variable, @env{LOGNAME}
@cindex @env{LOGNAME} environment variable
@vindex LOGNAME
@anchor{x-LOGNAME}
The eMail address which is used if the mailing option is wanted.
@xref{x-mail, , Global option @option{--mail@r{[}=@var{address}@r{]}}},
for more details.

@item MAILPROG
@cindex Environment variable, @env{MAILPROG}
@cindex @env{MAILPROG} environment variable
@vindex MAILPROG
@anchor{x-MAILPROG}
Name of the mailer program which is used if the mailing option is wanted.
Takes precedence over the file name @code{mail} which is burned-in during
the compilation step of the Gcal program.
@xref{x-mail, , Global option @option{--mail@r{[}=@var{address}@r{]}}},
for more details.

@item MAILTO
@cindex Environment variable, @env{MAILTO}
@cindex @env{MAILTO} environment variable
@vindex MAILTO
@anchor{x-MAILTO}
The eMail address which is used if the mailing option is wanted.
Takes precedence over @env{USER} and @env{LOGNAME}@.
@xref{x-mail, , Global option @option{--mail@r{[}=@var{address}@r{]}}},
for more details.

@item PAGER
@cindex Environment variable, @env{PAGER}
@cindex @env{PAGER} environment variable
@vindex PAGER
@anchor{x-PAGER}
Name of the @emph{external pager} program which is used
if the paging option is wanted.
@xref{x-pager, , Global option @option{--pager}},
for more details.

@item PATH
@cindex Environment variable, @env{PATH}
@cindex @env{PATH} environment variable
@vindex PATH
@anchor{x-PATH}
(@samp{:}) colon-separated list of file directories which are searched
to find the @emph{external pager} program.
@xref{x-pager, , Global option @option{--pager}},
for more details.

@item TERM
@cindex Environment variable, @env{TERM}
@cindex @env{TERM} environment variable
@vindex TERM
@anchor{x-TERM}
The type of terminal on which the Gcal program is being run.

@item TXT2GCALPROG
@cindex @env{TXT2GCALPROG} environment variable
@cindex Environment variable, @env{TXT2GCALPROG}
@vindex TXT2GCALPROG
@anchor{x-TXT2GCALPROG}
Contains the file name of the executable Txt2gcal program that is used by
the Gcal program to call the Txt2gcal program.  Takes precedence over the
file name @code{txt2gcal} which is burned-in during the compilation step
of the Gcal program.  The @env{TXT2GCALPROG} environment variable must
always be set if the Txt2gcal program is installed under another name
than the standard name @command{txt2gcal}, otherwise Gcal is unable to
execute the Txt2gcal program automatically!
@xref{Text variables},
for further details.

@item TZ
@cindex Environment variable, @env{TZ}
@cindex @env{TZ} environment variable
@vindex TZ
The timezone information which is added to the date text of sent eMails,
created response files and created shell script files.

@item USER
@cindex Environment variable, @env{USER}
@cindex @env{USER} environment variable
@vindex USER
@anchor{x-USER}
The eMail address which is used if the mailing option is wanted.
Takes precedence over @env{LOGNAME}@.
@xref{x-mail, , Global option @option{--mail@r{[}=@var{address}@r{]}}},
for more details.
@end table

@node Error Codes, Glossary, Environment Variables, Top
@appendix Error Codes
@tbindex Error codes
@tbindex Run-time error codes
@tbindex Exit codes
@cindex Error codes, table
@cindex Table of all error codes
@cindex Exit codes, table
@cindex Table of all exit codes
@cindex Program exit states, table
@cindex Run-time error codes, table
@cindex Whitespace character
@cindex EMail, error code

@noindent
Gcal produces the following @emph{exit codes}:
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@table @code
@item 127
Request for help screen, software license or program version (adjustable)@.

@item 126
@anchor{x-126-Error-code}
Invalid command line argument / option.

@item 125
Year out of range for computing the Easter Sunday's date.

@item 124
Virtual memory exhausted.

@item 123
Invalid date part in resource file or in include file.

@item 122
Invalid month field entry in resource file or in include file.

@item 121
Invalid day field entry in resource file or in include file.

@item 120
Malformed @emph{#include} statement in resource file or in include file.

@item 119
@anchor{x-119-Error-code}
Illegal recursive/cyclic @emph{#include} statement in resource file
or in include file.

@item 118
@anchor{x-118-Error-code}
Resource file or include file not found.

@item 117
Invalid @w{@var{n}'th} weekday field (only @w{@code{1@r{@dots{}}5}}
or @code{9} valid)@.

@item 116
Missing @emph{whitespace} separator character between @emph{date part}
and @emph{text part}@.

@item 115
Response file respectively shell script cannot be written.

@item 114
Invalid date variable operation.

@item 113
@anchor{x-113-Error-code}
Referenced date variable undefined.

@item 112
Invalid date value assigned to date variable.

@item 111
Sending output to eMail address failed.

@item 110
Internal error, C function pipe(), fork(), exec*() or unlink() failed.

@item 109
Error reading resource, include respectively response file.

@item 108
Illegal character found in response file.

@item 107
Internal error, invalid value for the size of an internal table occurred.

@item 106
Invalid date format text specified.

@item 105
Invalid text variable definition.

@item 104
Invalid regular expression search pattern specified.

@item 3
Program aborted by signal.

@item 2
@anchor{x-2-Error-code}
@emph{Exit code} not equal zero returned by external command.

@item 1
@anchor{x-1-Error-code}
Activated @w{@option{-c@r{|}C@r{[]}}},
@w{@option{-f@r{|}F @var{name}@r{[}+@r{@dots{}]}}} or
@w{@option{-# @var{line}}} option caused no output of resource file entries.

@item 0
Normal program termination.
@end table

@node Glossary, Argument Index, Error Codes, Top
@appendix Glossary
@tbindex Glossary
@cindex Glossary

@noindent
Here is an alphabetical list of most terms with short description
that are introduced and used in this manual:
@iftex
@sp 2
@end iftex

@table @dfn
@item Actual date modifier
@cindex Actual date modifier
Gcal uses that date as today's date which is declared by the actual date
modifier, instead of using the date that is given by computer's clock
as system date.

@item Alternation operator
@cindex Alternation operator
The @samp{|} metacharacter is used to specify alternatives
in a regular expression.

@item Amateur-astronomical twilight
@cindex Amateur-astronomical twilight
The time when the center of the Sun passes a reference
altitude of 15 degrees below a mathematical horizon.

@item Anchor
@cindex Anchor
The @samp{^} and @samp{$} metacharacters in a regular expression.

@item @acronym{ANSI}
@cindex @acronym{ANSI}
The American National Standards Institute.  This organization produces many
standards, among them the standards for the C and C++ programming languages.

@item Asr prayer time
@cindex Asr prayer time
The third Islamic prayer time.  Begins in the afternoon when
the length of the shadow cast by a vertical pole has a definite length,
and ends just before sunset.

@item Astronomical twilight
@cindex Astronomical twilight
The time when the center of the Sun passes a reference
altitude of 18 degrees below a mathematical horizon.

@item Astronomical unit
@cindex Astronomical unit
An astronomical unit, abbreviated by @acronym{ae}, is equal to the mean
distance of the Sun from the Earth, which is about @w{149,597,870.691}
kilometers.

@item Autumnal equinox point on the ecliptic
@cindex Autumnal equinox point on the ecliptic
The point where the descending Sun's orbit intersects the celestial equator.

@item Azimuth
@cindex Azimuth
The horizontal angular distance between the vertical circle,
that passes a celestial body, and the North point.

@item Biorhythm
@cindex Biorhythm
Ascending and descending curves which show three coherent biological
cycles, the physical, the emotional and the intellectual cycle.

@item @acronym{BSD}
@cindex @acronym{BSD}
Short term for @cite{Berkeley Software Distribution},
a Unix operating system variant.

@item C
@cindex C
The system programming language that most GNU software is written in.

@item Calendar option class
@cindex Calendar option class
The option which control the calendar layout.

@item Celestial axis
@cindex Celestial axis
The connecting line which runs between the celestial North and South Pole.

@item Celestial body elevation
@cindex Celestial body elevation
The vertical angular distance between the celestial body and the horizon.

@item Celestial equator
@cindex Celestial equator
A celestial great circle, which is vertical to the celestial axis
and simultaneously represents the Earth's equator that is projected
onto the celestial sphere.

@item Celestial Pole
@cindex Celestial Pole
The northern and southern lengthening of the Earth's rotation axis,
respectively, projected on the celestial sphere.

@item Character class
@cindex Character class
A character class in a regular expression is a special notation for
describing lists of characters that have a specific attribute, but
where the actual characters themselves can vary from country to
country and/or from character set to character set.

@item Character list
@cindex Character list
Matches any one of the characters that are enclosed in the
square brackets in a text, which is processed by a regular expression.

@item Character set
@cindex Character set
The set of numeric codes used by a computer system to represent the characters
(letters, numbers, punctuation, etc.@:) of a particular country or place.  The
most common character set in use today is @acronym{ASCII} (American Standard
Code for Information Interchange)@.  Many European countries use an extension
of @acronym{ASCII} known as @w{@acronym{ISO}-8859-1}
(@acronym{ISO} @w{Latin-1})@.

@item Civil Islamic calendar
@cindex Civil Islamic calendar
The arithmetically determined Islamic lunar calendar.

@item Civil midnight time
@cindex Civil midnight time
In terms of Gcal, this is 0 @w{o'clock}, the day change just took part.
This clocktime is alternatively also denoted as 24 @w{o'clock}, or @w{12pm}@.

@item Civil twilight
@cindex Civil twilight
The time when the center of the Sun passes a reference
altitude of 6 degrees below a mathematical horizon.

@item Collating element
@cindex Collating element
A special sequence that can appear in a character lists of a regular
expression.  This apply to non-@sc{ascii} character sets, which can
have single symbols that are represented with more than one character,
as well as several characters that are equivalent for collating,
or sorting, purposes.

@item Collating symbol
@cindex Collating symbol
A multi-character collating element of a regular expression that
is enclosed in @samp{[.} and @samp{.]} metacharacters.

@item Command line argument
@cindex Command line argument
A special text that is mostly given on the command line to run Gcal,
and which serves for controlling the program.

@item Command
@cindex Command
A special type of command line argument
which controls the periods Gcal respects.

@item Common option class
@cindex Common option class
The standard options all GNU software should implement at least partially.

@item Conjunction
@cindex Conjunction
A celestial body is either behind the Sun or is between Sun and Earth
(seen from the Earth), and is therefore non-visible from the Earth.
In terms of the Moon, this is the New Moon phase.

@item Critical day
@cindex Critical day
Those days in the biorhythm in which one or more of the biological cycles
crosses the zero point.  At that time, one's system is said to be in a state
of flux and it may be desirable to exhibit caution.

@item Cycle mode
@cindex Cycle mode
The dynamical, i.e.@: depending on the respective clocktime, Sun and Moon
oriented special texts are calculated for a series of clocktimes for the
current day, i.e.@: determination is done for any time interval that can
be individually defined by the user.

@item Date part
@cindex Date part
That part of a Gcal resource file line that contains the information
at which date a fixed date happens.

@item Decimal system
@cindex Decimal system
Base-ten notation, where the digits are @w{@code{0}@dots{}@code{9}}@.

@item Declination
@cindex Declination
The vertical angular distance between the center of a celestial body
and the celestial equator.

@item Delta-t
@cindex Delta-t
Delta-t is the difference between the Terrestrial Dynamical time
(abbreviated by @acronym{TDT}), that was formerly known as @emph{Ephemeris
time} (abbreviated by @acronym{ET}), and the Universal time (@acronym{UT}).
Thus, @w{@samp{delta-t @equiv{} TDT - UT}}@.

@item Early years
@cindex Early years
In terms of eternal holidays that are determined by Gcal, these are the years
within the period @acronym{AD} 30 until the midth of the 20th century.

@item Ecliptic latitude
@cindex Ecliptic latitude
The vertical angular distance between the center of a celestial body
and the ecliptic.

@item Ecliptic longitude
@cindex Ecliptic longitude
The vertical angular distance between the center of a celestial body
and the vernal equinox point on the ecliptic.

@item Ecliptic
@cindex Ecliptic
The zodiacal line or Sun's orbit.

@item Elongation
@cindex Elongation
The horizontal angular distance between the center of a celestial body
and the Sun's center, as seen from the Earth.

@item Ending date
@cindex Ending date
A part of a Gcal special text that defines the last
or latest date at which the fixed date may occur.

@item Environment
@cindex Environment
A collection of strings, of the form @w{@env{name}@code{=}@var{value}},
that each program has available to it.  Users generally place values into
the environment in order to provide information to various programs.
Typical examples are the environment variables @env{HOME} and @env{PATH}@.

@item Equation of time
@cindex Equation of time
A correction to be added to the true solar time ---as read on a sundial---
to obtain the mean solar time.

@item Equivalence class
@cindex Equivalence class
A list of equivalent characters of a regular expression
that is enclosed in @samp{[=} and @samp{=]} metacharacters.

@item Escape sequence
@cindex Escape sequence
A special sequence of characters used for describing non-printing characters,
such as @code{\E} or @code{\033} or @code{\x1B} for the @acronym{ASCII}
@code{ESC} (escape) character itself.

@item Evening width
@itemx Set width
@cindex Evening width
@cindex Set width
The horizontal angular distance between the set azimuth of a celestial body
and the West direction.

@item Exclusive day period
@itemx Exclusive date period
@cindex Exclusive day period
@cindex Exclusive date period
A Gcal special text that can be specified with the effect,
that only those fixed dates are respected and displayed
which are not part of a definite period.

@item Extended file name
@cindex Extended file name
A name that contains one ore more @samp{/} characters, and which denotes
a file, whose fixed access path either starts from the root file directory,
like @samp{/foo/bar/file}, or from the actual file directory,
like @samp{./bar/file} or @samp{../bar/file}@.

@item Extended language code information
@cindex Extended language code information
A simple language code information, which additionally has a
territory information that is separated by a @samp{_}, like
@code{en_us} for american English.

@item Fajr prayer time
@cindex Fajr prayer time
The first Islamic prayer time.  Begins with the beginning of astronomical
morning twilight, and ends just before sunrise.

@item Fixed date option class
@cindex Fixed date option class
The options which control the fixed date layout and intensity.

@item Format instruction
@cindex Format instruction
Text variables, special texts and date formats can be provided with such
an instruction text that results the special representation of the contents
of text variables, and the evaluated special texts and date formats.

@item FSF
@itemx Free Software Foundation
@cindex FSF
@cindex Free Software Foundation
A non-profit organization dedicated to the production and distribution
of freely distributable software.  It was founded by Richard M.@: Stallman,
the author of the original Emacs editor.

@item Geocentric data
@cindex Geocentric data
Observations of celestial bodies that are done from the
fictitious center of the Earth yield in geocentrically based values.

@item Geocentrical horizon
@cindex Geocentrical horizon
That fictitious horizontal plane that passes through the Earth's center,
orthogonal to the observer's local vertical.

@item Geometrical horizon
@itemx Mathematical horizon
@itemx Mathematical-geocentric horizon
@cindex Geometrical horizon
@cindex Mathematical horizon
@cindex Mathematical-geocentric horizon
A purely geometrically-built horizon which disregards the phenomenon of
refraction as it arises in reality by the influence of the Earth's atmosphere.

@item Global date variable
@cindex Global date variable
A Gcal date variable, which is defined in the command line.
Is visible in all referenced resource files.

@item Global option class
@cindex Global option class
The options which modify the program output.

@item Global text variable
@cindex Global text variable
A Gcal text variable, which is defined in the command line.
Is visible in all referenced resource files.

@item Gnomon
@cindex Gnomon
A vertical pole which is used to ascertain the length of a shadow.

@item GNU
@cindex GNU
@cite{GNU's not Unix}@.  An on-going project of the Free Software Foundation
to create a complete, freely distributable, @acronym{POSIX}-compliant computing
environment.

@item GPL
@itemx General Public License
@cindex GPL
@cindex General Public License
The terms under which Gcal and its source code may be distributed.

@item Gregorian calendar
@cindex Gregorian calendar
The calendar which was introduced in @acronym{AD} 1582 by Pope Gregory XIII,
that has an average year length of @w{365.2425} days.  This calendar is most
respected around the world today.

@item Hexadecimal system
@cindex Hexadecimal system
Base 16 notation, where the digits are @w{@code{0}@dots{}@code{9}} and
@w{@code{A}@dots{}@code{F}}, with @samp{A} representing 10, @samp{B}
representing 11, and so on up to @samp{F} for 15.

@item Highest culmination point
@cindex Highest culmination point
The highest point above or below the horizontal plane
which transits a celestial body during a day.

@item Highlighting sequence
@cindex Highlighting sequence
A control character sequence which cause a color or intensity switch in
output text.  Typical control character sequences are the @acronym{ANSI}
escape sequences which have a leading escape character, and trailing more
characters that define the type of the @acronym{ANSI} escape sequence.

@item Horizontal parallax
@cindex Horizontal parallax
The horizontal parallax of a celestial body specifies the diameter
of the Earth as it is seen from the surface of the celestial body.

@item Hybrid calendar mode
@cindex Hybrid calendar mode
The automatical change from one calendar system to another if there
are relations to a date for which the other calendar system is valid.
Thus, Gcal automatically changes from the Julian calendar system to the
Gregorian calendar system if output is related to dates after the
Gregorian Reformation has happened.

@item Inclusive day period
@itemx Inclusive date period
@cindex Inclusive day period
@cindex Inclusive date period
A Gcal special text that can be specified with the effect,
that only those fixed dates are respected and displayed
which are part of a definite period.

@item Integer number
@cindex Integer number
A whole number, i.e.@: a number that does not have a fractional part.

@item Interval expression
@cindex Interval expression
One or two numbers inside braces in a regular expression.

@item Isha prayer time
@cindex Isha prayer time
The fifth Islamic prayer time.  Begins at the end of the astronomical
evening twilight, and ends just before the astronomical midnight time
of the Sun.

@item @acronym{ISO}
@cindex @acronym{ISO}
@acronym{ISO} is the abbreviation of @cite{International Organization
for Standardization}@.

@item @acronym{ISO} week number
@cindex @acronym{ISO} week number
The week starts on a Monday, and the first week of a year is the one which
includes the first Thursday; equivalently, the one which includes the
4th January.

@item Julian Ephemeris date
@cindex Julian Ephemeris date
A Julian date that is corrected by @emph{delta-t}@.

@item Julian calendar
@cindex Julian calendar
The calendar which was introduced in 46 @acronym{BC} by Julius Caesar
and in the later years corrected by emperor Augustus, that has an
average year length of @w{365.25} years.  This calendar was replaced
by the Gregorian calendar in @acronym{AD} 1582.

@item Julian date
@itemx Julian day number
@cindex Julian date
@cindex Julian day number
A day number that is based on the date 1st January 4713 BCE, which is
the starting day zero of a consecutive day counting used in astronomical
computations.  The real zero of this date is at 12 @w{o'clock} Universal
time @w{(UTC/GMT)}; the day does not change at midnight, but at noon
Universal time.

@item Leap day
@cindex Leap day
The 29th February in the Gregorian calendar.

@item Leap year
@cindex Leap year
In the Gregorian calendar, a leap year is any year which number can be
divided by 4 without a remainder, and years ending in hundreds are no
leap years unless they are divisible by 400@.  But the Eastern Orthodox
churches compute leap years within the Gregorian calendar by using another
rule; and that, a leap year is any year which number can be divided by 4
without a remainder, and years ending in hundreds are leap years, if a
remainder of 2 or 6 occurs when such a year is divided by 9@.

@item Legal holiday
@cindex Legal holiday
A day people don't have to work --- as in most companies, and businesses
are closed; like @w{@samp{New Year's Day}} on January 1st.

@item Lists of commands
@itemx Ranges of commands
@cindex Lists of commands
@cindex Ranges of commands
Produce more than one calendar sheet per program run.

@item Local date variable
@cindex Local date variable
A Gcal date variable, which is defined in a resource file.  Is visible only
in this specific resource file, and that file which is included by it.

@item Local star time
@itemx Local sidereal time
@cindex Local star time
@cindex Local sidereal time
The momentary period which is past between the last upper culmination
of the vernal equinox point in the meridian of the observer's location
(the momentary hour angle of the vernal equinox point), thus the right
ascension of the stars in the observer's meridian at the moment.

@item Local text variable
@cindex Local text variable
A Gcal text variable, which is defined in a resource file.  Is visible only
in this specific resource file, and that file which is included by it.

@item Long-style option
@cindex Long-style option
A special ---non-standard--- style to write an option,
e.g.@: @option{--foo}@.

@item Lowest culmination point
@cindex Lowest culmination point
The lowest point below or above the horizontal plane
which transits a celestial body during a day.

@item Lunar Arctic Circle
@cindex Lunar Arctic Circle
The geographical latitude circle that is between about @w{61.5}
and @w{71.9} decimal degrees, and the geographical pole.

@item Lunation
@itemx Synodic month
@cindex Lunation
@cindex Synodic month
The mean time between two consecutive New Moon phases.

@item Maghrib prayer time
@cindex Maghrib prayer time
The forth Islamic prayer time.  Begins at sunset, and ends at the beginning
of the @emph{Isha} prayer time.

@item Magnitude unit
@cindex Magnitude unit
Is used to define the brightness of a star, and is a non-metrical value
(Latin term @cite{magnitudo}, abbreviated @acronym{m})@.  The difference
between two consecutive magnitudes is 1 to @w{2.512}@.  Therefore, a star
with the brightness of @w{1@acronym{m}} is @w{2.512} times brighter than
a star of @w{2@acronym{m}}@.  A negative magnitude denotes a very bright star,
for example almost @w{-27@acronym{m}} for the Sun, whereas the hardly visible
planet Pluto has a magnitude of a bit more than @w{+14@acronym{m}}@.  The Full
Moon has a visual brightness of about @w{-12@acronym{m}.55}@.

@item Marking character
@cindex Marking character
Single, printable characters which lead and trail
the output text for marking purposes.

@item Mean Earth equator radius
@cindex Mean Earth equator radius
The mean radius of Earth at the equator is about @w{6,378.137} kilometer.

@item Mean solar time
@itemx Mean solar day
@itemx Mean sun
@cindex Mean solar time
@cindex Mean solar day
@cindex Mean sun
A star day is also known as a @emph{mean solar day}@.  Because the Sun
apparently shifts with respect to the vernal equinox point on the ecliptic
due to the Earth's orbit around the Sun, the star day and the true solar day
have a different length.  As the true Sun namely moves irregularly through
the ecliptic, a fictitious @emph{mean Sun} with a symmetrical motion through
the celestial equator is used for deriving the mean solar time.

@item Meridian
@cindex Meridian
Either a geographical longitude
or an astronomical vertical circle.

@item Metacharacters
@itemx Regular expression operators
@cindex Metacharacters
@cindex Regular expression operators
Special characters in a regular expression.

@item Midnight height
@cindex Midnight height
The elevation of a celestial body
as it happen at astronomical midnight time of the celestial body.

@item Midnight phase angle
@cindex Midnight phase angle
The phase angle of a celestial body
as it happen at astronomical midnight time of the celestial body.

@item Modifier
@cindex Modifier
One or more characters which directly trail a short-style option,
and which define a special mode of operation for this option.

@item Morning width
@itemx Rise width
@cindex Morning width
@cindex Rise width
The horizontal angular distance between the rise azimuth of a celestial body
and the East direction.

@item Nautical twilight
@cindex Nautical twilight
The time when the center of the Sun passes a reference
altitude of 12 degrees below a mathematical horizon.

@item Negated character list
@itemx Complemented character list
@cindex Negated character list
@cindex Complemented character list
Matches any one of the characters, except those in the square
brackets, in a text, that is processed by a regular expression.

@item Negative day
@cindex Negative day
Those days in the biorhythm in which one or more of the biological cycles have
a negative maximum value.  At that time, one's system is said to be in a lessen
state.

@item Noon height
@cindex Noon height
The elevation of a celestial body
as it happen at astronomical noon time of the celestial body.

@item Noon line
@cindex Noon line
The straight line which connects the North and the South point.

@item Noon phase angle
@cindex Noon phase angle
The phase angle of a celestial body
as it happen at astronomical noon time of the celestial body.

@item Octal system
@cindex Octal system
Base-eight notation, where the digits are @w{@code{0}@dots{}@code{7}}@.

@item Opposition
@cindex Opposition
The Earth is in one line between the celestial body and the Sun, and
therefore, the celestial body is completely visible from the Earth.
In terms of the Moon, this is the Full Moon phase.

@item Option
@cindex Option
A special type of command line argument
which controls how Gcal behaves.

@item Orthodrome
@cindex Orthodrome
A great circles arc that is casted between two points on a surface of a
sphere.  Is the shortest geodetic connecting line between two points on a
sphere.

@item Pattern
@cindex Pattern
A pattern is an arbitrary conditional expression against which input is tested.
If the condition is satisfied, the pattern is said to @cite{match} the input.
A typical pattern might compare the input against a regular expression.

@item Phase angle
@cindex Phase angle
The phase angle states the phase of a celestial body,
i.e.@: the illuminated fraction of it as it can be seen from the Earth.

@item Pipelining
@cindex Pipelining
The output of a program is used as an input data stream for another program.

@item Positive day
@cindex Positive day
Those days in the biorhythm in which one or more of the biological cycles have
a positive maximum value.  At that time, one's system is said to be in a raised
state.

@item @acronym{POSIX}
@cindex @acronym{POSIX}
The name for a series of standards being developed by the @acronym{IEEE}
that specify a Portable Operating System interface.  The @cite{IX} denotes
the Unix heritage of these standards.

@item Proleptic calendar mode
@cindex Proleptic calendar mode
This means, Gcal only uses a definite calendar system during a definite
period, although there was a change to another calendar system in the
historic reality during this definite period.

@item Rational number
@itemx Floating Point number
@cindex Rational number
@cindex Floating Point number
This is a number that can have a fractional part.

@item @acronym{RFC}
@cindex @acronym{RFC}
@acronym{RFC} is the abbreviation of @cite{Request for Comments}@.

@item Redirection
@cindex Redirection
The output of a program is sent to another device instead of sending it
to the @emph{standard output channel}@.

@item Refraction
@cindex Refraction
Refraction is an optical phenomenon caused by the Earth's atmosphere, which
leads to an apparent raising of the location of a celestial body.  The
amount of refraction increases with growing air pressure and sinking
temperature and @w{vice-versa}@.

@item Regexp
@itemx Regular expression
@cindex Regexp
@cindex Regular expression
A way of describing a set of strings.

@item Relative time offset value
@cindex Relative time offset value
A time offset value which is related to a base time.

@item Religious Islamic calendar
@cindex Religious Islamic calendar
The astronomically determined Islamic lunar calendar.

@item Resource file
@cindex Resource file
A file that essentially contains the fixed date entries.

@item Response file
@cindex Response file
A file used by Gcal to preload options and commands at program start-up.
A response file may contain options and commands, but @strong{no} references
to further response files.

@item Right ascension
@cindex Right ascension
The horizontal angular distance between the center of a celestial body and the
hour circle that passes through the vernal equinox point on the ecliptic.

@item Rise azimuth
@cindex Rise azimuth
The azimuth of a celestial body
as it happen at rise time of the celestial body.

@item Rise height
@cindex Rise height
The elevation of a celestial body
as it happen at rise time of the celestial body.

@item Rise phase angle
@cindex Rise phase angle
The phase angle of a celestial body
as it happen at rise time of the celestial body.

@item Set azimuth
@cindex Set azimuth
The azimuth of a celestial body
as it happen at set time of the celestial body.

@item Set height
@cindex Set height
The elevation of a celestial body
as it happen at set time of the celestial body.

@item Set phase angle
@cindex Set phase angle
The apparent phase angle of a celestial body
as it happen at set time of the celestial body.

@item Shell
@cindex Shell
The command processor of the operating system.  This operating system
program interprets and runs given command lines.

@item Short-style option
@cindex Short-style option
The traditional ---standard--- style to write an option,
e.g.@: @option{-x}@.

@item Simple file name
@cindex Simple file name
A name that denotes a file, whose access-path either does not start
from the root file directory or from the actual file directory,
like @samp{file} or @samp{bar/file}@.

@item Simple language code information
@cindex Simple language code information
A language code that consists of two-letters like @code{de} for the
German language, as it is defined in the @w{@acronym{ISO}-639:1988}@.

@item Single command
@itemx 3-Month mode command
@cindex Single command
@cindex 3-Month mode command
Produce only one calendar sheet per program run.

@item Solar Arctic Circle
@cindex Solar Arctic Circle
The geographical latitude circle that is between about @w{66.7}
and @w{65.9} (corrected for atmospheric refraction) decimal degrees,
and the geographical pole.
For computing the different twilight phases, this latitude circle
decreases to about:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@w{60.7} decimal degrees for civil twilight.

@item
@w{54.7} decimal degrees for nautical twilight.

@item
@w{51.7} decimal degrees for amateur-astronomers twilight.

@item
@w{48.7} decimal degrees for astronomical twilight.
@end itemize

@item Special text
@cindex Special text
A text in a Gcal resource file which is started by a @samp{%} character
and whose purpose is to suppress output of fixed dates in definite cases,
either, or to provide them with particular texts respectively to start
external commands.

@item Summer point on the ecliptic
@itemx Summer solstice
@itemx Solstice in summer
@cindex Summer point on the ecliptic
@cindex Summer solstice
@cindex Solstice in summer
The Sun's orbit crosses the highest point above the celestial equator
that is passed during a revolution of the Earth around the Sun.

@item Standard week number
@cindex Standard week number
The week starts on the respective starting day of the week, and the days in
a new year that are preceding the first starting day of the week are in the
last week of the previous year, respectively in week zero of the new year.

@item Star day
@cindex Star day
The period between two consecutive upper culminations of the vernal equinox
point on the ecliptic in the meridian of the observer's location.

@item Starting date
@cindex Starting date
A part of a Gcal special text that defines the first
or earliest date at which the fixed date may occur.

@item Statute mile
@cindex Statute mile
A linear measure, one statute mile is equal to @w{1.609344} kilometer.

@item String
@cindex String
A chain of characters.

@item Switch character
@cindex Switch character
An option is defined by a leading switch character, either the @samp{-}
or the @samp{/} character for traditional short-style options, or @samp{--}
for mnemonic long-style options; a command may not have a leading switch
character.

@item Text part
@cindex Text part
That part of a Gcal resource file line that contains the fixed date text.

@item Topocentric data
@cindex Topocentric data
Observations of celestial bodies that are done from the
surface of the Earth yield in topocentrically based values.

@item True solar time
@itemx True solar day
@cindex True solar time
@cindex True solar day
A true solar day is the period between two consecutive lower culminations
of the Sun.  This entity is taken as the base for deriving the true solar
time (as it is also shown by a sundial during the day)@.

@item True track
@itemx Course angle
@cindex True track
@cindex Course angle
The course angle gives the direction, which is the vertex of a great circles
arc (Orthodrome) that is casted between two points on a surface of a sphere,
at a meridian (Gcal uses a geoid (rotation ellipsoid) that is calculated
taking pattern from the @cite{World Geodetic System}, short @acronym{W.G.S},
that was designed in 1961)@.  Such an arc is the shortest geodetic connecting
line between two points on a sphere.  Indeed, the course angles on such an arc
are changing continually, because the circular line that is casted intersects
each meridian with another angle --- except the case, that both co-ordinates
are referring to exactly the same longitude or to exactly the same latitude.

@item Twilight
@cindex Twilight
The interval of time before sunrise and again after sunset, during which
natural light is provided by the upper atmosphere that does receive
direct sunlight and reflects parts of it towards the Earth's surface.

@item Unix
@cindex Unix
A computer operating system originally developed in the early 1970's at
@acronym{AT&T} Bell Laboratories.  It initially became popular in universities
around the world, and later moved into commercial environments as a software
development system and network server system. There are many commercial
versions of Unix, as well as several work-alike systems whose source code
is freely available (such as Linux, @w{Net@acronym{BSD}},
and @w{Free@acronym{BSD}})@.

@item Vernal equinox point on the ecliptic
@cindex Vernal equinox point on the ecliptic
The point where the ascending Sun's orbit intersects the celestial equator.

@item Whitespace character
@cindex Whitespace character
For example @emph{Tab}, @emph{Space}, @emph{Form-feed} and similar characters.

@item Winter point on the ecliptic
@itemx Winter solstice
@itemx Solstice in winter
@cindex Winter point on the ecliptic
@cindex Winter solstice
@cindex Solstice in winter
The Sun's orbit crosses the lowest point below the celestial equator
that is passed during a revolution of the Earth around the Sun.

@item Word
@cindex Word
A sequence of one or more letters, digits, or underscores (@samp{_})
in a regular expression.

@item Zuhr prayer time
@cindex Zuhr prayer time
The second Islamic prayer time.  Begins after the astronomical noon time
of the Sun, and ends at the beginning of the @emph{Asr} prayer time.
@end table
@c
@c %**End of manual part



@c %**Start of index part
@c
@node Argument Index, Variable Index, Glossary, Top
@unnumbered Command Line Argument Index
@noindent
Here is an alphabetical list of the command line arguments processed by Gcal:
@printindex ar

@node Variable Index, Table Index, Argument Index, Top
@unnumbered Environment Variable Index
@noindent
Here is an alphabetical list of the environment variables checked by Gcal:
@printindex vr

@node Table Index, GNU Free Documentation License, Variable Index, Top
@unnumbered Table Index
@noindent
Here is an alphabetical list of the most import tables, summaries and
other general views that can be found in this manual:
@printindex tb

@node GNU Free Documentation License, Concept Index, Table Index, Top
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License

@include fdl.texi

@node Concept Index, , GNU Free Documentation License, Top
@unnumbered Concept Index
@ifnothtml
@printindex cp
@end ifnothtml
@ifhtml
(removed)
@end ifhtml
@c
@c %**End of index part



@bye
